clay: [
      { 
        id: 24, 
        name: 'Wheat', 
        image: cropImages.wheat, 
        titleDescription: 'Wheat in clay soils achieves higher yields due to moisture retention, requiring careful land preparation and timely operations for optimal organic production.',
        description: {
          stage1: `Land Preparation and Planning
Wheat is not a crop you plant on a whim. Success begins with planning a year or more in advance, choosing the right field, and building the soil before the seed ever goes in the ground.

Step 1.1: Choose the Right Field
Wheat grows best in well-drained loam or clay-loam soils that hold moisture but do not waterlog. The soil should be deep and fertile, with a neutral pH . Avoid fields with a history of persistent perennial weeds like wild garlic or Italian ryegrass, as there are no good organic methods to control these once wheat is planted . Also avoid fields known to have soil-borne viruses, as these cannot be eliminated once present .

Step 1.2: Practice Long Rotations
Never plant wheat in the same field two years in a row. Wheat stubble left from the previous year harbors diseases like Fusarium head blight (scab), Septoria, and tan spot, as well as Hessian fly pupae that will attack a new crop . The safest approach is to plant wheat only once every three or four years in a given field, rotating with legumes, oilseeds, or other crops that break disease cycles .

Step 1.3: Choose a Field Away from Last Year's Wheat
If possible, select a field that is at least a quarter mile away from any field that grew wheat the previous year . This distance helps prevent Hessian flies and other pests from migrating into your new crop .

Step 1.4: Build Soil Fertility with Previous Crops
Wheat's fertility needs are best met by what happened in the field before planting. A legume crop plowed under or a well-managed pasture adds nitrogen and organic matter to the soil . Good soil structure, built by previous crops and organic amendments, is essential for wheat's fibrous root system.

Step 1.5: Prepare a Firm, Fine Seedbed
Wheat needs a seedbed that is firm enough to support the drill and fine enough to ensure good seed-to-soil contact. Plow or till to incorporate previous crop residue, then harrow and level to create a smooth surface. The goal is a seedbed that is not too fluffy, so seeds are planted at a uniform depth.

Step 1.6: Add Organic Amendments Based on Need
If soil tests show deficiencies, add well-decomposed compost or manure before planting. However, avoid excessive nitrogen, which can cause lodging (falling over) and disease problems . Wheat is a moderately heavy feeder, but it prefers steady, balanced nutrition over a feast .

Step 1.7: Consider the Previous Crop's Residue
If you are planting after a crop that left a lot of residue, such as maize, that residue must be well incorporated and partially decomposed before wheat planting . Fresh, heavy residue can interfere with planting and harbor pests.
`,
          stage2: `Variety Selection and Seed Treatment
Choosing the right variety is perhaps the most important decision in organic wheat farming. There is no single best variety, so planting more than one variety spreads your risk .

Step 2.1: Choose Disease-Resistant Varieties
The two biggest disease threats to wheat are Fusarium head blight (scab) and Hessian fly . Only choose varieties that are rated as moderately resistant to scab. Avoid varieties rated poorly for Hessian fly resistance, especially if you are planting on time or early .

Step 2.2: Match Maturity to Your Climate
To avoid spring freeze injury, choose medium- or late-heading varieties rather than early-heading ones . The variety should be adapted to your region's day length and temperature patterns.

Step 2.3: Consider Your End Market
If you are growing wheat for the baking industry or for chapati flour, check with the end user about preferred varieties . Different wheats have different protein contents and gluten strengths, which affect their end use.

Step 2.4: Plant Multiple Varieties
Because no single variety performs best every year, plant at least two different varieties each season . This reduces your risk from pests, diseases, and weather.

Step 2.5: Use High-Quality, Untreated Seed
Start with clean, untreated seed from a reliable source. Seed should have high germination rates and be free from weed seeds, especially noxious weeds like wild garlic or ryegrass .

Step 2.6: Consider Seed Treatments
While many organic farmers plant untreated seed, you can treat seeds with beneficial microbes like Trichoderma to protect against soil-borne diseases. Some farmers also use compost tea or other biological seed treatments.
`,
          stage3: `Planting
Timing is everything in wheat production. Planting too early or too late invites disaster.

Step 3.1: Plant at the Optimum Time
Not too early, and not too late! Planting too early puts the crop at severe risk for powdery mildew, Hessian fly, aphids, and barley yellow dwarf virus . Planting too late reduces yields, increases winter annual weed problems, and results in thin stands vulnerable to insect feeding . The optimum planting window for your region is a narrow one, based on your local climate and the first freeze date.

Step 3.2: Calibrate Your Drill
A good, uniform stand of wheat is the best defense against weeds and insects . Take the time to calibrate your seed drill accurately. Check that all rows are planting at the same depth and that seed spacing is even.

Step 3.3: Plant at the Correct Depth
Plant wheat seeds at a consistent, medium depth, about one to two inches deep . In heavier soils or moist conditions, plant shallower. In sandy soils or dry conditions, plant slightly deeper. All seeds should emerge at the same time for a uniform stand.

Step 3.4: Use Narrow Row Spacing
Wheat planted in narrow rows, about six to eight inches apart, will shade the soil faster and suppress weeds . Some organic farmers use rows as narrow as four inches to help the crop outcompete winter annual weeds .

Step 3.5: Avoid Broadcast Seeding if Possible
Broadcast seeding often results in uneven seed depth and emergence, leading to lower yields . If you must broadcast, increase your seeding rate significantly to compensate for poor establishment, and use an implement that incorporates seed at a uniform depth .

Step 3.6: Plant at the Right Density
A thick, healthy stand is essential. Target a seeding rate that will produce a dense population of plants, enough to tiller well and shade out weeds. Increase the seeding rate if planting is delayed or if seed germination is below optimum .
`,
          stage4: `Field Management During Growth
Once wheat is planted, there is little you can do beyond monitoring and waiting. Most of the work happens before planting.

Step 4.1: Understand Tillering
Wheat plants produce multiple shoots from the base, called tillers. Each tiller can produce a seed head. A well-managed wheat crop with good spacing and fertility will produce many tillers, each contributing to the final yield . This is why early management is so important—every tiller you gain now is grain later.

Step 4.2: Weed Management Through Competition
Essentially all weed control in organic wheat must be achieved before planting . Once wheat is up, its own competitiveness is your main tool. A thick, vigorous stand planted at the right time in narrow rows will shade the soil and smother most weeds . Wheat is a strong competitor when given the right start.

Step 4.3: Pre-Emergence and Early Cultivation (Optional)
In some systems, a rotary hoe or tine weeder can be used before the crop emerges and again at the one-to-three leaf stage to kill small weed seedlings . However, this is not common in wheat because the crop is drilled in narrow rows.

Step 4.4: Water Management
Wheat is often grown as a rainfed crop and does not need irrigation in many regions. However, if you have irrigation, the most critical time for water is during stem elongation and grain filling. Drought during these stages severely reduces yield.

Step 4.5: Spring Nitrogen Management
If the crop appears nitrogen-deficient in early spring, you can apply a top-dressing of compost, manure, or an approved organic nitrogen source . The application window for spring nitrogen is very narrow, and only the immediately available fraction of organic fertilizers will benefit the crop in time . Some organic farms have enough nitrogen carryover from previous crops and may not need any spring application . A tissue test can help determine if additional nitrogen is needed .

Step 4.6: Pest Monitoring

4.6.1. Aphids
Aphids are small insects that suck plant sap and can transmit barley yellow dwarf virus . They are usually kept in check by natural enemies like lady beetles and parasitic wasps, which are abundant in wheat fields . Cold weather also kills them. Planting after the first freeze is the best way to avoid aphid problems .

4.6.2. Cereal Leaf Beetle
Both adult beetles and larvae feed on leaves. Larvae feeding in April and May can reduce yields. The best defense is a thick, densely tillered stand that can compensate for leaf loss . Practices that promote thick stands—planting on time, using quality seed, adequate fertility—reduce the risk of significant damage .

4.6.3. Armyworm
Armyworm infestations are sporadic but can be devastating when they occur, causing defoliation and even cutting off heads . No cultural controls are available. If an infestation occurs, organic farmers can either accept the damage or use an approved organic insecticide like spinosad or pyrethrin in emergency situations .

Step 4.7: Disease Monitoring

4.7.1. Scab (Fusarium Head Blight)
This disease infects flowering heads, causing bleaching and shriveled grain. It also produces toxins that make grain unsafe for consumption . The only defense is planting resistant varieties. Once the disease appears, there is no treatment.

4.7.2. Powdery Mildew
This fungal disease appears as white powder on leaves. It is worse in dense stands planted too early . Proper planting date and variety selection are the only controls.

4.7.3. Soilborne Mosaic Virus
This virus is transmitted by a soil-dwelling organism and can severely reduce yields . There is no cure. Fields with a history of this virus must be planted with resistant varieties or taken out of wheat production .

`,
          stage5: `Harvesting
Harvest timing is critical for preserving grain quality and preventing losses.

Step 5.1: Know When the Grain is Mature
Wheat is ready to harvest when the grain is hard and cannot be dented with your fingernail. The straw will have turned completely yellow and dry, and the heads will nod downward. Grain moisture should be low.

Step 5.2: Do Not Let Mature Grain Stand
Once wheat is mature, harvest promptly. Mature grain left standing in the field risks losses from birds, weather, and lodging . It also loses quality.

Step 5.3: Combine at the Right Settings
Adjust your combine to minimize grain cracking and loss. Harvest when the grain is dry enough to store but not so dry that it shatters easily.

Step 5.4: Create Seasonal Employment
Some organic farmers, like Sucha Singh Pabla in Punjab, employ manual labor for harvesting and threshing, creating valuable seasonal employment in their communities . This is a choice that can benefit both the farmer and local workers.

Step 5.5: Handle Grain Gently
Wheat grain is living and can be damaged by rough handling. Use care when moving grain to prevent cracking.
`,
          stage6: `Post-Harvest and Storage
Step 6.1: Clean the Grain
After harvest, clean the grain to remove chaff, weed seeds, and broken kernels. This improves storage life and market quality.

Step 6.2: Dry the Grain Thoroughly
Wheat must be dried to a safe moisture level for storage. Spread it in thin layers in the sun or use a low-temperature dryer if needed. Grain that is too moist will mold and spoil.

Step 6.3: Store in Clean, Dry Conditions
Store wheat in clean, dry bins or gunny bags. Protect it from rodents, birds, and insects. Keep storage areas clean and well-ventilated. Store bags off the ground on pallets.

Step 6.4: Check Stored Grain Regularly
Monitor stored grain for signs of heating, moisture, or insect infestation. If problems appear, you may need to re-dry or clean the grain.

Step 6.5: Add Value Through Processing
Some organic farmers increase their profits by processing their wheat into flour or other value-added products . The premium price for organic wheat, combined with lower input costs from on-farm compost and natural methods, can make organic wheat profitable even with lower yields .

Step 6.6: Save Seed for Next Season
If you grew a variety you want to keep, select the best, cleanest grain from your harvest to save as seed for next year. Store it separately with extra care.

Step 6.7: Incorporate Straw Back into Soil
After harvest, the straw remaining in the field is a valuable resource. Chop and spread it, then incorporate it into the soil. This returns organic matter and nutrients, building soil health for future crops . Avoid burning straw, which pollutes the air and destroys organic matter.

By following these stages, you can grow healthy, high-quality wheat naturally, work with its unique tillering ability and competitive nature, and harvest a profitable crop while building your soil for the future without using any chemicals.
`,
        },
        water: 'Medium', 
        temp: '10-15°C', 
        duration: '120-150 days', 
        soil: 'Clay soil', 
        fertilizer: 'NPK 120:60:40', 
        yield: '3-3.8 tons/ha' 
      },
      { 
        id: 25, 
        name: 'Chickpea', 
        image: cropImages.chickpea, 
        titleDescription: 'Chickpea in clay soils benefits from residual moisture, requiring careful drainage and proper seedbed preparation for successful organic pulse production.',
        description: {
          stage1: `Land Preparation
Chickpeas are not demanding crops, but they are very sensitive to certain soil conditions. Getting the land right is the first step to success.

Step 1.1: Choose the Right Field
Chickpeas grow best in soils that are well-drained and not too heavy. They absolutely cannot stand waterlogging. If water stands in the field, the roots will rot and the plants will die. Soils that are light to medium in texture, with good structure, are ideal. Avoid heavy clay soils that hold water for long periods. The soil should be neutral to slightly alkaline, not acidic. If the soil is too acidic, the plants will not grow well and the nitrogen-fixing bacteria on their roots will not work properly .

Step 1.2: Deep Ploughing for Deep Roots
Chickpeas send a deep taproot into the soil. Start with a deep ploughing using a soil-turning plough. This breaks any hard pans or compacted layers below the surface, allowing the taproot to penetrate deeply and access moisture stored in the subsoil .

Step 1.3: Create a Fine, Firm Seedbed
After deep ploughing, do two or three harrowings or ploughings with a country plough. After each ploughing, do planking. Planking means dragging a heavy wooden plank over the field to break clods and level the surface. The goal is a seedbed that is fine and firm, not too fluffy. A firm seedbed ensures that all seeds are planted at a uniform depth and have good contact with the soil. This is especially important for chickpeas because they are planted after the rains, on stored soil moisture.

Step 1.4: Time Your Preparation Correctly
In many regions, chickpeas are grown in the rabi (winter) season on moisture left over from the monsoon. Land preparation must be timed carefully. The first seedbed preparation can be done early, but the final preparation should happen when the soil has the right moisture—not too wet, not too dry. If the soil is too wet, it will become compacted. If too dry, it will be hard to work. Wait for the soil to dry enough after the monsoon rains so that it is workable but still has good moisture below .

Step 1.5: Add Organic Manure
During the final ploughing, spread well-decomposed farmyard manure or compost over the field and mix it into the soil . Research has shown that applying farmyard manure significantly improves the growth and yield of chickpeas compared to no manure . The manure should be well-rotted, not fresh.

Step 1.6: Level the Field
A well-leveled field ensures that any irrigation or rainfall spreads evenly and does not collect in low spots. Use a leveller to make the field as flat as possible. Chickpeas are especially sensitive to water collection around their stems.
`,
          stage2: `Seed Selection and Treatment
Chickpea seeds are relatively large, with a wrinkled surface and a pointed tip. The seed is the most important input, and it must be treated carefully to protect it from soil-borne diseases.

Step 2.1: Select the Right Variety
Choose a variety that is suited to your region and your growing season. Some varieties mature early, some take longer. In areas with a short growing season, choose an early-maturing variety. Also consider whether you want to harvest green chickpeas for fresh eating or wait for the dried grain.

Step 2.2: Obtain Good Quality Seed
Use certified seed from a reliable source, or save your own seed from a healthy, disease-free crop. The seeds should be plump, uniform in size, and free from cracks, discoloration, or damage. Avoid seeds that are shriveled or have small holes.

Step 2.3: Soak Seeds Before Sowing
A simple but effective treatment is to soak the seeds in plain water for some time before sowing. This enhances the germination percentage by hydrating the seed and activating the embryo .

Step 2.4: Treat with Sour Buttermilk
A traditional method to control wilt and root rot diseases is to treat the seeds with sour buttermilk. Mix the seeds with well-fermented, sour butter milk and then dry them in the shade before sowing. The acidic nature of the buttermilk creates an environment that suppresses disease-causing fungi in the soil around the seed .

Step 2.5: Treat with Turmeric and Sweet Flag
Another traditional treatment is to smear the seeds with a mixture of turmeric powder and sweet flag powder. Mix these powders with a little water to make a paste, coat the seeds, and sow after a short time. This enhances the disease resistance of the crop .

Step 2.6: Treat with Trichoderma
For extra protection against soil-borne diseases, treat the seeds with Trichoderma powder, a friendly fungus that lives on the seed coat and fights off harmful fungi. Moisten the seeds slightly, then add the powder and mix until all seeds are coated.

Step 2.7: Inoculate with Rhizobium
Chickpeas need a specific type of Rhizobium bacteria to form nodules on their roots and fix nitrogen from the air. If chickpeas have not been grown in your field recently, the right bacteria may not be present in sufficient numbers. Treat the seeds with the specific Rhizobium culture for chickpeas just before planting. This ensures that millions of the right bacteria are right there on the seed, ready to infect the roots and form nitrogen-fixing nodules .
`,
          stage3: `Planting
Planting at the right time and depth is critical for chickpeas because they depend on stored soil moisture.

Step 3.1: Plant at the Right Time
Chickpeas are typically planted in the rabi season, after the monsoon rains have ended and the soil has sufficient moisture. In many regions, this is from October to November. Planting too early can expose the crop to excess moisture and disease. Planting too late means the soil may be too dry, and the crop may not have enough time to mature before temperatures rise in spring.

Step 3.2: Plant at the Right Depth
Plant chickpea seeds at a medium depth, not too shallow and not too deep. If planted too shallow, the seed may dry out or be eaten by birds. If planted too deep, the seedling may not have enough energy to reach the surface. A depth of about two inches is generally good .

Step 3.3: Maintain Proper Spacing
The space between rows and between plants affects how well the crop grows and how much it yields.

Between Rows: Rows should be spaced so that there is enough room for the plants to grow without competing too much for moisture, but close enough that the canopy covers the ground and suppresses weeds. A spacing of about 12 to 18 inches between rows is common .

Between Plants: Within the row, plants should be spaced a few inches apart . If they are too crowded, they will compete and yields will suffer. If too spaced out, weeds will take over.
Research has shown that closer spacing can give higher yields, but the best spacing depends on your variety and soil conditions .

Step 3.4: Line Sowing is Best
Sowing in straight lines using a seed drill or by dropping seeds in furrows opened by a country plough is better than broadcasting. Line sowing ensures uniform depth and spacing, makes weeding easier, and gives each plant an equal chance to grow.

Step 3.5: Cover the Seeds
After dropping the seeds, cover them with soil. This can be done by passing a light plank over the field or by using a small country plough to push soil back into the furrows. The covering should be uniform so that all seeds emerge at the same time.

Step 3.6: Do Not Irrigate Immediately
Chickpeas are grown on residual moisture. If you have planted at the right time into soil with good moisture, you should not need to irrigate immediately. In fact, too much water at this stage can cause the seeds to rot.
`,
          stage4: `Field Management During Growth
Chickpeas are a low-maintenance crop once established, but they need attention at certain stages.

Step 4.1: Watch for Emergence
The seeds will sprout and emerge within one to two weeks, depending on soil temperature and moisture . Walk through the field after emergence and look for any gaps. If there are large gaps, you may need to replant those spots, but this is difficult after the crop has started.

Step 4.2: Weed Management
Weeds compete with young chickpeas for moisture and nutrients. However, chickpeas are not very competitive against weeds, so you must keep the field clean in the early stages.

Mechanical Weeding: Use a hoe or cultivator between the rows to cut weeds. This is best done when the chickpeas are small, before they start flowering .

Timing: The first weeding should be done about three to four weeks after sowing. A second weeding may be needed later, depending on weed growth.

Care: Be careful not to damage the chickpea plants or their shallow roots when weeding.

Step 4.3: Understanding Nitrogen Fixation
About a month after planting, gently dig up a few chickpea plants and look at the roots. You should see small round nodules attached to the roots. Slice a few open with your fingernail. If they are pink or red inside, your inoculation worked perfectly, and the bacteria are actively fixing nitrogen from the air for the plant. This is a sign of a healthy crop.

Step 4.4: Water Management
Chickpeas are drought-tolerant and generally do not need irrigation if grown on good residual moisture. In fact, they prefer dry conditions once established. However, if there is a prolonged dry spell during flowering and pod filling, and if you have irrigation available, a single light irrigation can help. Do not over-water, and do not irrigate late in the season, as this can encourage diseases and delay maturity.

Step 4.5: Pest Management

Chickpeas do not suffer from many pests, but there are a few to watch for.

4.5.1. Pod Borer
The main pest of chickpeas is the pod borer, a caterpillar that feeds on the developing pods and grains. Walk through the field and look for holes in pods or caterpillars on the plants.

Monitoring: Check your field regularly, especially during flowering and pod formation.

Neem Spray: If you see pod borer damage, spray a neem-based solution on the plants. Neem repels and disrupts the feeding of many caterpillars.

Encourage Natural Enemies: Maintain flowering plants on field borders to attract beneficial insects like parasitic wasps that attack pod borers.

4.5.2. Cutworms
Cutworms are caterpillars that cut young seedlings at the base. They are more common in fields with heavy crop residue.

If you see cutworm damage, remove any mulch or residue from around the base of affected plants to expose the caterpillars to birds and sun.

Step 4.6: Disease Management

Diseases are a bigger challenge in chickpeas than pests, especially wilt and root rots.

4.6.1. Wilt and Root Rot
These are fungal diseases that cause plants to wilt and die. They are most common in soils that are too wet or in fields where chickpeas have been grown too often.

Prevention is Key: The best control is prevention through crop rotation. Do not grow chickpeas in the same field more than once every three to four years .

Seed Treatment: The seed treatments described earlier (buttermilk, turmeric, Trichoderma) are your main defense against these diseases.

Remove Infected Plants: If you see a plant wilting and dying, pull it out and destroy it. This removes the source of infection from the field.

4.6.2. Mildew and Botrytis
In prolonged wet weather, chickpeas can suffer from powdery mildew or grey mold (Botrytis) . These fungal diseases appear as white powdery spots or grey fuzzy growth on leaves and pods.

Good Air Flow: Proper spacing and weed control help air circulate through the crop, reducing humidity and the risk of these diseases.

Remove Affected Parts: If you see disease starting, remove affected leaves or plants to slow the spread.

Sulfur Spray: In severe cases, a sulfur-based spray approved for organic farming can be used.

4.6.3. Bacterial Blights
Bacterial diseases can also affect chickpeas, causing spots on leaves and pods.

Crop Rotation: Rotating crops and composting old plant debris helps manage bacterial diseases .

Do Not Work in Wet Fields: Avoid walking through or working in the field when the plants are wet, as this can spread bacterial diseases.
`,
          stage5: `Harvesting
Chickpeas can be harvested at two different stages: as green, fresh peas or as mature, dried grain.

Step 5.1: Harvesting Green Chickpeas
If you want to harvest green chickpeas for fresh eating, pick them when you can feel the peas through the pods. This is usually about two months after sowing . The peas will be green and tender. Harvest regularly to encourage the plant to produce more pods. Wear gloves when harvesting in sunny weather, as the leaves can give off a substance that irritates the skin .

Step 5.2: Harvesting for Dried Grain
If you are growing chickpeas for dried grain, wait until the plants are fully mature. The leaves will turn yellow and dry, and the pods will turn brown or tan and become brittle. The seeds inside will rattle when you shake the pod . The seeds should be hard and not dent when pressed with a fingernail.

Step 5.3: Cut the Plants
When the crop is fully mature, cut the plants close to the ground using a sickle or a sharp knife. Let them dry in the field in small piles or windrows for a few days. This allows the remaining moisture in the plants to finish drying the pods.

Step 5.4: Protect from Rodents and Birds
As the grain dries, it becomes attractive to rodents and birds. If you are drying the plants in the field, watch for damage. In some areas, farmers stack the plants in a dry, protected place for final drying.

Step 5.5: Threshing
Once the plants and pods are completely dry, thresh them to separate the grain. This can be done by beating the plants with sticks on a clean floor, by having bullocks walk on them, or by using a threshing machine. If using a machine, adjust it gently so it does not crack the seeds.

Step 5.6: Winnowing
After threshing, the grain is mixed with chaff, broken pods, and dust. On a breezy day, winnow the mixture by dropping it from a height using a winnowing fan or basket. The wind blows away the light chaff, and the clean, heavy grain falls straight down.

Step 5.7: Cleaning
After winnowing, remove any remaining stones, broken seeds, or other debris by hand or with a simple sieve.
`,
          stage6: `Post-Harvest and Storage
Step 6.1: Dry the Grain Thoroughly
Even after threshing and winnowing, the grain may still have some moisture. Spread the clean grain in a thin layer on clean mats, tarpaulins, or a clean cemented floor. Turn it frequently so it dries evenly. Dry it in the sun for several days until it is completely hard and dry. Bite a seed; it should crack, not squash.

Step 6.2: Test for Moisture
Chickpeas stored with any moisture will develop mold and weevils. Make sure the grain is bone-dry before storage.

Step 6.3: Prepare Storage Containers
Clean your storage containers or gunny bags thoroughly. If reusing old bags, make sure they are completely clean and dry. Do not leave any old grain inside, as it may contain hidden insects.

Step 6.4: Mix with Natural Protectants
If you store grain in bags or bins, mix in some dried neem leaves or other aromatic leaves that repel insects. Some farmers also mix ash with the grain to deter weevils. Make sure the ash is cool and completely dry before mixing.

Step 6.5: Store Off the Ground
If using gunny bags, store them on wooden pallets or planks raised off the ground. Do not let the bags touch the wall, as walls can get damp. Keep the storage area clean, dry, and well-ventilated.

Step 6.6: Save Seed for Next Season
If you want to save your own seed for the next season, select the best, healthiest, and most uniform grains from your harvest. Store them separately in a clean, dry container. Chickpea seeds can remain viable for about three years if stored properly .

Step 6.7: Check Storage Periodically
Check your stored grain every few weeks. Put your hand deep into the grain and feel for any heat or moisture. Look for any signs of insects or mold. If you find any problems, re-dry the grain in the sun immediately.

By following these stages, you can grow healthy chickpeas naturally, work with their unique deep-rooted and drought-tolerant nature, and harvest good quality grain without using any chemicals.
`,
        },
        water: 'Low', 
        temp: '20-25°C', 
        duration: '90-110 days', 
        soil: 'Clay soil', 
        fertilizer: 'NPK 20:60:40', 
        yield: '1.2-1.8 tons/ha' 
      },
      { 
        id: 26, 
        name: 'Mustard', 
        image: cropImages.mustard, 
        titleDescription: 'Mustard in clay soils benefits from moisture reserves, requiring proper drainage and timely sowing for optimal organic oilseed production in heavy soils.',
        description: {
          stage1: `Land Preparation and Planning
Mustard is a rabi (winter) season crop that grows on the moisture left behind by the monsoon rains. Getting the land ready at the right time sets the stage for success.

Step 1.1: Choose the Right Field
Mustard is a drought-hardy crop that can grow under diverse conditions and in different types of soils . It grows best in well-drained loamy soils that are neutral to slightly acidic in pH . The most important requirement is good drainage. Mustard cannot tolerate waterlogging or standing water, which causes root rots. Avoid heavy clay soils that hold water for long periods.

Step 1.2: Practice Crop Rotation
Mustard belongs to the Brassica family and should not be grown in the same field year after year. A rotation of several years between Brassica crops is essential to prevent the buildup of soil-borne diseases . Good rotations include following mustard with grains, legumes, or other non-Brassica crops.

Step 1.3: Prepare the Soil After Monsoon
Land preparation for mustard begins after the monsoon rains end, when the soil has the right moisture. Start with a deep ploughing using a soil-turning plough. This breaks any hard pans and allows the deep taproot to penetrate.

Step 1.4: Create a Fine, Firm Seedbed
After deep ploughing, do two or three harrowings to bring the soil to a fine tilth. Planking after each ploughing helps break clods and level the field. The goal is a seedbed that is fine and firm, ensuring good seed-to-soil contact and uniform germination .

Step 1.5: Add Organic Manure
During the final ploughing, spread well-decomposed farmyard manure or compost over the field and mix it into the soil. Mustard responds well to organic matter, which helps the soil hold moisture during the dry winter months. The manure should be well-rotted, not fresh.

Step 1.6: Conserve Soil Moisture
Mustard is grown on residual moisture from the monsoon. After final ploughing, level the field well to ensure that the limited moisture is spread evenly. If your field has a slope, plough across the slope to catch and hold any winter rains.
`,
          stage2: `Seed Selection and Treatment
Choosing the right variety and treating the seed properly is the foundation of a good mustard crop.

Step 2.1: Choose the Right Variety
India is the largest mustard-growing country in the world, and there are many improved varieties available . Choose a variety suited to your region and your growing season. Some varieties mature early, some take longer. Early-maturing varieties can escape late-season drought or pest pressure. High-yielding varieties with good oil content are available through agricultural universities and extension agencies.

Step 2.2: Consider Dual-Purpose Varieties
If you want to harvest mustard greens as well as seeds, choose a variety known for both good leaf production and good seed yield. Some varieties are specifically bred for their leafy greens, while others are optimized for oilseed production.

Step 2.3: Obtain Quality Seed
Use certified seed from a reliable source, or save your own seed from a healthy, disease-free crop. The seeds should be plump, uniform in color, and free from damage or discoloration. Mustard seeds have a limited shelf life of about three years, after which germination rates decline .

Step 2.4: Treat Seeds with Trichoderma
To protect young seedlings from soil-borne diseases like damping off and root rots, treat the seeds with Trichoderma powder, a friendly fungus. Moisten the seeds slightly, then add the powder and mix until all seeds are coated. Dry in the shade and plant as soon as possible.

Step 2.5: Treat with Bio-Fertilizers
Mustard benefits from beneficial bacteria like Azotobacter and phosphorus-solubilizing bacteria that help the roots access nutrients. Treat the seeds with these bio-fertilizers just before planting. This can be done along with the Trichoderma treatment.

Step 2.6: Test Seed Germination
A simple way to check if your seed is good is to take a handful of seeds and place them on a wet cloth. Roll the cloth and keep it moist for a few days. After that, open it and see how many seeds have started sprouting. If most have sprouted, your seed is good.
`,
          stage3: `Planting
Timing and spacing are critical for mustard. Plant too early or too late, and you invite pests and diseases.

Step 3.1: Plant at the Right Time
Mustard is a rabi season crop. In most regions, the best time to sow is from mid-October to mid-November . Sowing at the right time ensures that the crop gets enough cool weather for vegetative growth and avoids pest pressure. In some areas, sowing continues until mid-September for winter varieties .

Step 3.2: Sow at the Correct Depth
Plant mustard seeds at a shallow depth, about one inch deep . In heavier soils or moist conditions, plant shallower. In sandy soils or if the soil is drying out, plant slightly deeper. Uniform depth ensures that all seeds emerge at the same time.

Step 3.3: Maintain Proper Spacing
Proper spacing is essential for good growth and yield .

Between Rows: Space rows about 12 to 18 inches apart. This allows enough room for air circulation, which reduces disease.

Between Plants: Within the row, thin plants to about 4 to 6 inches apart.

For dual-purpose varieties where you will also harvest greens, you may plant slightly closer and harvest some plants as greens, leaving others to mature for seed.

Step 3.4: Line Sowing is Best
Sowing in straight lines using a seed drill or by dropping seeds in furrows opened by a country plough is much better than broadcasting. Line sowing ensures uniform depth and spacing, makes weeding easier, and gives each plant an equal chance to grow.

Step 3.5: Plant at the Right Density
A thick, healthy stand is essential for good yields. Plant at a seed rate that will produce a dense population of plants, enough to tiller well and shade out weeds. Increase the seeding rate if planting is delayed or if seed germination is below optimum.

Step 3.6: Cover the Seeds
After dropping the seeds, cover them with soil. This can be done by passing a light plank over the field or by using a small country plough to push soil back into the furrows. Lightly firm the soil to ensure good seed-to-soil contact.
`,
          stage4: `Field Management During Growth
Mustard grows through distinct stages: seedling, vegetative growth, flowering, and pod filling. Each stage needs different attention.

Step 4.1: Watch for Emergence
Mustard seeds germinate quickly, usually within a week, depending on soil temperature and moisture. Walk through the field after emergence and look for any gaps. If there are large gaps, you may need to replant those spots.

Step 4.2: Thinning
When the seedlings are a few inches tall, about two to three weeks after emergence, thin them to the desired spacing . Remove the weaker seedlings, leaving the strongest ones with enough space. Thinning ensures that each remaining plant has room to grow into a large, productive bush.

Step 4.3: First Weeding
Weeds compete with young mustard for water and nutrients. Do the first weeding about three to four weeks after sowing, before the weeds get big . Use a hoe or cultivator between the rows. Be careful not to damage the young plants.

Step 4.4: Second Weeding
A second weeding is usually done about two weeks after the first, if needed. By this time, the mustard plants should be growing rapidly and will soon shade the ground, suppressing further weed growth.

Step 4.5: Water Management
Mustard is moderately drought-tolerant, but it responds well to irrigation at critical stages .

Young Plants: Keep soil moist to help them establish.

Vegetative Growth: Mustard can tolerate dry spells.

Critical Stages: The most water-sensitive stages are flowering and pod development. If you have irrigation, this is the time to use it .

Avoid Over-Watering: Do not overwater, as mustard cannot tolerate waterlogging. Too much water can harm roots and trigger fungal diseases .

Step 4.6: Nutrition and Feeding
A well-fed crop is a high-yielding crop .

Basal Dressing: The compost or manure you added at planting provides a good base.

Top Dressing: If your soil is poor, you can apply a side dressing of compost or liquid organic fertilizer like compost tea or diluted cow urine during the vegetative growth stage .

Foliar Sprays: Foliar sprays enriched with micronutrients can encourage better flowering and pod formation . Healthy plants produce more seeds and richer oil content.

Step 4.7: Pest Management

*4.7.1. Aphids - The Most Serious Pest*
Aphids are small insects that suck sap from plants, causing leaves to curl and plants to weaken. They are the main pest of mustard .

Monitoring: Check plants regularly, especially during flowering. Look for clusters of aphids on tender shoots and under leaves.

Natural Predators: Encourage ladybugs and lacewings by maintaining flowering plants around the field. These natural enemies will help control aphids.

Neem Spray: If aphid populations build up, spray a neem-based solution. Neem repels and disrupts the feeding of many insects.

Botanical Extracts: Research has shown that extracts from plants like nutmeg can also be effective against aphids.

4.7.2. Sawfly
Sawfly larvae are caterpillar-like insects that feed on leaves, defoliating plants.

Monitoring: Check plants for larvae, especially on leaf undersides.

Hand Picking: If populations are small, you can hand-pick the larvae and destroy them.

Neem Spray: Neem-based sprays can help control sawfly.

4.7.3. Flea Beetles
These tiny beetles riddle the leaves with small holes. They are most common on young seedlings .

Row Covers: Floating row covers placed over young plants physically exclude the beetles.

Silver Mulch: Silver-colored plastic mulch can repel flea beetles .

Natural Sprays: If necessary, use pyrethrin-based sprays, which are approved in organic farming .

4.7.4. Integrated Pest Management
A combination of methods works best:

Monitor fields regularly.

Encourage natural predators.

Use botanical sprays only when pest pressure is high.

Maintain crop rotations to break pest cycles.

Step 4.8: Disease Management

4.8.1. White Rust
This fungal disease appears as white, blister-like pustules on leaves and stems. It can cause swelling and distortion of floral parts .

Prevention: Use disease-free seed and practice crop rotation.

Resistant Varieties: Choose varieties with resistance to white rust if available.

Remove Infected Plants: If you see infected plants, remove and destroy them to prevent spread.

4.8.2. Downy Mildew
This disease causes yellowish spots on upper leaf surfaces and a downy growth on undersides. It is favored by cool, moist conditions .

Prevention: Ensure good air circulation through proper spacing. Avoid overhead irrigation.

Crop Rotation: Long rotations help reduce disease buildup.

Remove Infected Plants: Remove and destroy severely infected plants.

4.8.3. Alternaria Blight
This fungal disease causes dark, target-like spots on leaves and pods .

Prevention: Use disease-free seed and practice crop rotation.

Seed Treatment: Treat seeds with Trichoderma to reduce seed-borne infection.

Neem Spray: Neem-based sprays can help suppress the disease.

4.8.4. Disease Prevention Practices
The best defense against diseases is prevention:

Crop Rotation: Follow a 5-7 year rotation between Brassica crops .

Good Air Flow: Proper spacing allows air to circulate, reducing humidity.

Clean Seed: Always use clean, disease-free seed.

Remove Crop Residue: After harvest, remove or incorporate crop residue to reduce disease carryover.
`,
          stage5: `Harvesting
Harvesting at the right time is critical for preserving oil quality and preventing seed loss.

Step 5.1: Know When the Crop is Mature
Mustard is ready for harvest when the leaves turn yellow and start to dry, and the pods turn from green to brown or tan . The seeds inside will be hard and rattle when you shake the pod.

Step 5.2: Harvest at the Perfect Time
Do not wait too long to harvest, or the pods will shatter and shed their seeds . Harvest when most pods are mature but before they start shattering.

Step 5.3: Cut the Plants
Use a sharp sickle or knife to cut the plants close to the ground. Let them dry in the field in small piles or windrows for a few days. This allows the remaining moisture in the plants to finish drying the pods.

Step 5.4: Handle with Care
Mustard pods shatter easily. Handle the cut plants gently to avoid losing seeds. If possible, harvest in the early morning when pods are less likely to shatter.

Step 5.5: Threshing
Once the plants and pods are completely dry, thresh them to separate the grain. This can be done by beating the plants with sticks on a clean floor, by having bullocks walk on them, or by using a threshing machine. If using a machine, adjust it gently to minimize seed damage.

Step 5.6: Winnowing
After threshing, the grain is mixed with chaff, broken pods, and dust. On a breezy day, winnow the mixture by dropping it from a height using a winnowing fan or basket. The wind blows away the light chaff, and the clean, heavy grain falls straight down.

Step 5.7: Drying the Grain
Spread the clean grain in a thin layer in the sun for several days to ensure it is perfectly dry. Bite a seed; it should be very hard and crack, not squash. Proper drying is essential for safe storage and preserving oil quality .
`,
          stage6: `Post-Harvest and Storage
Step 6.1: Storage Pests
The main pest of stored mustard is various stored grain insects. Clean storage and proper drying are the best defenses.

Step 6.2: Dry Grain Thoroughly
Ensure the grain is completely dry before storage. Mustard seeds stored with any moisture will develop mold and lose oil quality.

Step 6.3: Clean Storage Containers
Clean your storage containers or gunny bags thoroughly. If reusing old bags, make sure they are completely clean and dry. Do not leave any old grain inside, as it may contain hidden insects.

Step 6.4: Mix with Natural Protectants
If you store grain in bags or bins, you can mix in dried neem leaves or other aromatic leaves that repel insects. Make sure the leaves are completely dry before mixing.

Step 6.5: Store in a Cool, Dry Place
Store mustard grain in a cool, dry, well-ventilated place away from moisture and direct sunlight . Protect it from rodents and insects. Keep bags off the ground on wooden pallets.

Step 6.6: Preserve Oil Quality
Proper storage preserves oil quality and ensures your crop fetches the best price in the market .

Step 6.7: Save Seed for Next Season
If you want to save your own seed for the next season, select the best, healthiest, and most uniform grains from your harvest. Store them separately in a clean, dry container. Mustard seeds can remain viable for a limited time if stored properly, usually up to three years .

Step 6.8: Add Value Through Processing
Some organic farmers increase their profits by processing mustard seeds into oil, which can be sold at a premium. The oil content in mustard varieties ranges from 33 to 46 percent . Value addition through oil extraction can significantly increase profitability.

Step 6.9: Use Crop Residue
After threshing, the remaining stalks and chaff can be incorporated into the soil as organic matter. Mustard residue, with its bio-fumigant properties, can help suppress soil-borne pests and diseases for the next crop.

Step 6.10: Check Stored Grain Periodically
Check your stored grain every few weeks. Put your hand deep into the grain and feel for any heat or moisture. Look for any signs of insects or mold. If you find any problems, re-dry the grain in the sun immediately.

By following these stages, you can grow healthy, high-quality mustard naturally, work with its unique drought-hardy and soil-improving nature, and harvest a profitable crop of oil-rich seeds without using any chemicals.
`,
        },
        water: 'Low', 
        temp: '10-25°C', 
        duration: '90-120 days', 
        soil: 'Clay soil', 
        fertilizer: 'NPK 60:40:40', 
        yield: '1-1.5 tons/ha' 
      },
      { 
        id: 27, 
        name: 'Barley', 
        image: cropImages.barley, 
        titleDescription: 'Barley is a hardy rabi cereal tolerant to salinity and drought, with organic methods producing grain for food, feed, and malting industries.',
        description: {
          stage1: `Land Preparation and Planning
Barley is not a demanding crop, but it thrives when given the right start in well-prepared soil.

Step 1.1: Choose the Right Field
Barley prefers light, moderately fertile soils, from sandy to moderately heavy loam . It has a remarkable tolerance for saline and alkaline soils, which makes it a good choice for fields where other crops might struggle . The most important requirement is good drainage. Barley does very poorly in wet, waterlogged, or acidic conditions . A neutral to slightly alkaline pH is ideal, within a range of about 6.0 to 8.5 .

Step 1.2: Understand Barley's Climate Needs
Barley is a cool-season crop that thrives in mild temperatures. It prefers cool, dry growing conditions, ideally with temperatures between 12 to 15 degrees Celsius during early growth . It is quite adaptable and can be grown in both temperate and subtropical regions . In many areas, it is planted in the spring for a summer harvest or in the fall as a winter crop .

Step 1.3: Practice Long Rotations
Like all grains, barley should not be grown in the same field year after year. Rotating barley with other crops, such as legumes or oilseeds, is essential for breaking disease cycles and preventing the buildup of pests . A good rotation helps maintain soil fertility and ensures healthier crops.

Step 1.4: Prepare a Fine, Firm Seedbed
Barley needs a well-prepared seedbed for good germination . If possible, prepare the soil in the fall for an early spring sowing . Start with a deep ploughing to bury crop residue, then do two or three harrowings to bring the soil to a fine tilth. Planking after each ploughing helps break clods and level the field. The goal is a seedbed that is fine and firm, ensuring good seed-to-soil contact and uniform emergence .

Step 1.5: Consider a Stale Seedbed for Weed Control
A smart technique is to prepare the soil and then wait for weeds to sprout. If you can till and water the soil in the fall, allow the weeds to germinate, then rake or till again to kill the weed seedlings before planting. By following this method, your weed problems will be much less the following year .

Step 1.6: Add Organic Matter and Nutrients
Barley has modest nutrient needs, but it benefits from good soil fertility. During final ploughing, spread well-decomposed farmyard manure or compost over the field and mix it into the soil . If a soil test shows deficiencies, you can add natural amendments like rock phosphate for phosphorus. The legacies of previous crops, especially nitrogen-fixing legumes, are a key part of barley's fertility in organic systems .

Step 1.7: Conserve Soil Moisture in Rain-fed Areas
If you are growing barley on rainfall, moisture conservation is critical. In rain-fed areas, ploughing can be done in the evening, while planking should be done in the early morning to reduce evaporation . Leaving the field undisturbed for a week before sowing can also help with seed germination .
`,
          stage2: `Seed Selection and Treatment
Choosing the right variety is one of the most important decisions in organic barley farming.

Step 2.1: Understand the Different Types of Barley
There are two main types of barley: covered (hulled) and naked (hull-less) .

Covered Barley: The grain has a tough, inedible hull attached. It requires pearling or dehulling for most food uses, which removes some of the bran and germ . It is the traditional type for malting and animal feed.

Naked Barley: The grain threshes free of its hull, similar to wheat . It retains all its nutritional value as a whole grain and is easier to process for food use, requiring less equipment .

Step 2.2: Match Variety to Your Region and End Use
Choose a variety suited to your climate, your growing season (spring or winter), and your intended market . If you are growing for malt, the grain needs specific quality characteristics . If you are growing for food, a naked barley might be a better choice. Researchers are also working on developing dual-purpose (grain and fodder) and high-quality malt varieties .

Step 2.3: Look for Disease-Resistant Varieties
Diseases like Fusarium head blight (scab), stripe rust, and powdery mildew can severely impact barley yields and quality . Choosing varieties with resistance to these diseases is a key organic strategy. For example, the "Quest" variety has improved Fusarium head blight resistance .

Step 2.4: Obtain Quality, Untreated Seed
Use clean, untreated seed from a reliable source. Every effort must be made to source organic seed . The seed should have high germination rates and be free from weed seeds.

Step 2.5: Test Seed Germination
A simple way to check if your seed is good is to take a handful of seeds and place them on a wet cloth. Roll the cloth and keep it moist for a few days. After that, open it and see how many seeds have started sprouting. If most have sprouted, your seed is good. Barley seeds typically germinate in 3 to 15 days, depending on soil temperature .

Step 2.6: Consider Seed Treatments
While many organic farmers plant untreated seed, you can treat seeds with beneficial microbes like Trichoderma to protect against soil-borne diseases.
`,
          stage3: `Planting
Timing and method are critical for giving barley a strong start.

Step 3.1: Plant at the Right Time
The preferred sowing time depends on whether it is a spring or winter variety.

Spring Barley: Sow in early spring, about four weeks before the last frost date, or from late March to early April . It is important to be patient and allow soil temperatures to warm up sufficiently (to around 45-50°F) and for the land to be dry enough to ensure the crop emerges quickly and evenly .

Winter Barley: Sow in the fall, from mid-September through mid-October . Winter varieties require cold temperatures in order to produce seed heads in the spring .

Step 3.2: Sow at the Correct Depth
Plant barley seeds at a consistent depth. The ideal depth is about 50 to 75 millimeters, or roughly 1 to 2 inches . If using a broadcast method, rake the seed in to ensure good soil contact .

Step 3.3: Maintain Proper Seeding Rate
A thick, healthy stand is essential for good yields and for suppressing weeds. The seeding rate depends on your method and goals. For cover cropping, a higher rate is used to create a dense mat . For grain production, a lower rate is used . For smaller plots, you can aim for about 1 seed every 2 square inches .

Step 3.4: Line Sowing or Broadcasting
Barley can be sown in rows using a seed drill (line sowing) or broadcast by hand . Line sowing ensures uniform depth and makes weed management easier. Broadcasting is faster but may result in less uniform stands. If broadcasting, a drop spreader works well to spread the seed uniformly .

Step 3.5: Ensure Good Seed-to-Soil Contact
After sowing, it is helpful to lightly rake the seedbed to ensure the seed is in good contact with the soil . Rolling after sowing can also help keep moisture in the seedbed, especially in a dry season .

Step 3.6: Protect from Birds
Birds, especially crows, love to eat newly sown seeds, particularly the larger seeds of legumes if interplanted . Keep a watchful eye for bird damage in the early stages of establishment and use appropriate deterrents such as scarecrows or bangers if required .
`,
          stage4: `Field Management During Growth
Barley is a low-maintenance crop once established, but it needs attention at certain stages.

Step 4.1: Watch for Emergence
The seeds will sprout and emerge within 3 to 15 days, depending on soil temperature . Walk through the field after emergence and look for any gaps.

Step 4.2: Understand Tillering
Barley, like other grasses, produces side shoots at the surface of the ground called tillers. This "stooling" or "tillering" produces more stalks and mature heads, which greatly increases the total yield . Early planting can encourage tillering.

Step 4.3: Weed Management
Weeds compete with barley for water and nutrients. The best weed control in organic barley is achieved through prevention and competition.

Early Sowing: Timely sowings are a big help. Grains sown early will out-compete many weeds .

High Seeding Rates: Maintaining high seeding rates helps reduce weed competition .

Crop Rotation: Rotating crops helps break weed cycles .

Manual Weeding: Because barley is planted so closely together, hand-pulling weeds is often the best control for any that do appear .

Step 4.4: Water Management
Barley is fairly drought-tolerant and requires minimal water compared to other crops . Historically, it is native to areas of low annual rainfall . A minimum of 8 to 10 inches of water per year is needed for good yields .

Critical Stages: Proper moisture during critical growth stages like seedling, tillering, and grain filling is essential for high yields .

Avoid Over-Watering: Do not over-water. Avoid waterlogging and heavy irrigation, as they can harm the plants . Let the soil surface dry out between watering to help prevent diseases . Avoid heavy watering when the plants are pollinating or after the grain starts to mature .

Step 4.5: Mulching
Applying a mulch with clean straw or leaves to a depth of a few inches can help retain soil moisture and suppress weeds .

Step 4.6: Nutrition and Feeding
Barley requires modest levels of nutrition .

Avoid Excess Nitrogen: Highly fertile soils or too much nitrogen can cause lower protein levels and may lead to lodging, where the heavy heads fall over, making harvest difficult .

Basal Dressing: The compost or organic amendments added at planting, along with the fertility built by previous crops, usually provide enough nutrition.

Fertilizer: One pound of a complete organic fertilizer per 100 square feet is generally enough for the crop during the growing season .

Step 4.7: Pest Management

Barley can be affected by a few insect pests.

4.7.1. Aphids
Aphids are small insects that cluster on new growth and suck plant sap . They can also transmit viruses like Barley Yellow Dwarf .

Natural Predators: Encourage ladybugs and other beneficial insects.

Sprays: If necessary, use insecticidal soap or neem oil. In conventional systems, pyrethrin is an option, but use with caution in organic systems .

4.7.2. Thrips
Thrips are tiny insects that can damage leaves and heads .

Monitoring: Check plants regularly.

Sprays: If necessary, use insecticidal soap or neem oil.

4.7.3. Rodents and Soil Insects*
Identifying and managing soil insects, forage pests, and rodents are crucial to prevent crop damage .

Step 4.8: Disease Management

Disease prevention is the goal in organic barley farming.

4.8.1. Fusarium Head Blight (Scab)
This is a serious fungal disease that infects the heads, causing discolored, shriveled grain and producing toxins that make grain unsafe for consumption . It is favored by wet conditions during flowering.

Prevention: The best defense is planting resistant varieties . Crop rotation also helps.

4.8.2. Stripe Rust and Stem Rust
These fungal diseases cause stripes or pustules on leaves and stems, reducing yield .

Prevention: Choose resistant varieties .

4.8.3. Powdery Mildew
This fungal disease appears as white, powdery spots on leaves .

Prevention: Ensure good air circulation. Choose resistant varieties . In conventional systems, products like Zonix are options, but use with caution in organic systems .

4.8.4. Barley Yellow Dwarf Virus
This virus is transmitted by aphids and can cause stunting and yield loss .

Prevention: Control aphids and avoid planting barley after corn, which can harbor the virus .

4.8.5. Disease Prevention Practices
The best defense against diseases is prevention:

Resistant Varieties: This is the most important tool.

Crop Rotation: Long rotations are essential.

Good Air Flow: Proper spacing allows air to circulate.

Clean Seed: Always use clean, disease-free seed.
`,
          stage5: `Harvesting
Harvesting at the right time is critical for preserving grain quality and preventing losses.

Step 5.1: Know When the Grain is Mature
Barley is ready for harvest when the plant has turned from green to golden brown and the seeds are hardening . The grain should be hard and no longer release a milky liquid when pressed. The ideal moisture content for harvest is around 13% or less for safe storage . Delayed harvesting can lead to yield losses and grain discoloration .

Step 5.2: Check for Maturity Stages
There are three stages to look for when growing barley :

Milky Stage: Press a grain and see a milky liquid ooze out. Not ready.

Dough Stage: The liquid hardens inside the grain and the grain will show a dent when pinched. Approaching readiness.

Mature Stage: The grain is hard and the heavy heads often bend forward. Ready to harvest.

Step 5.3: Harvest at the Right Time
Harvest when most of the green color has turned brown and the seeds are in the hard dough stage . For malting barley, the timing is even more critical and often requires a specific moisture content.

Step 5.4: Harvesting Methods
Barley can be harvested manually or using machines, depending on the scale .

Small Scale: Use a hand sickle to cut the grain near the base. Lay the cut grain in bundles all going the same way, and then tie these into sheaves. Stand them up in small piles (stooks) in the field for one to two weeks to dry thoroughly .

Large Scale: Use a combine harvester when the grain is dry enough .

Step 5.5: Handle Gently
Barley grain is living and can be damaged by rough handling. Use care when moving grain to prevent cracking.
`,
          stage6: `Post-Harvest and Storage
Step 6.1: Threshing
Threshing refers to separating the grain heads from the stalk . This can be done in several ways:

For small amounts, you can rub the heads with your hands, hit the stalks with a wooden stick, or bang the seed heads inside a clean metal trash can .

Naked (hull-less) varieties can be easily cleaned by hand-threshing and winnowing .

For larger amounts, you may need a flail or a mechanical thresher .

Step 6.2: Winnowing
Winnowing is the process of separating the grain from the lighter chaff and impurities . The easiest way is to throw the threshed grain into the air on a breezy day and let the wind blow away the small particles. You can also use a fan to blow the chaff away .

Step 6.3: Clean the Grain
After winnowing, clean the grain to remove any remaining broken kernels or debris.

Step 6.4: Dry the Grain Thoroughly
Barley must be dried to a safe moisture level for storage. If you harvested early or the grain is still moist, spread it in a thin layer in the sun to dry completely. Grain that is too moist will mold and spoil.

Step 6.5: Store in Clean, Dry Conditions
Store barley in a cool, dry, well-ventilated area . Use airtight plastic buckets, large glass jars, or organic-certified bags or containers . Protect it from rodents, birds, and insects. Keep storage containers off the ground.

Step 6.6: Protect from Pests in Storage
To prevent insect infestations like Indian meal moths (pantry moths), you can place a desiccant pack in each container, store the grain in a freezer, or put a tablespoon of diatomaceous earth in each 5-gallon container . Diatomaceous earth is non-toxic and can be easily removed by screening.

Step 6.7: Save Seed for Next Season
If you want to save your own seed for the next season, select the best, healthiest, and most uniform grains from your harvest. Store them separately in a clean, dry container with extra care.

Step 6.8: Add Value Through Processing
Barley's value can be increased through processing . It can be sold as whole grain, pearled, ground into flour, malted for brewing, or even used as a cover crop .

By following these stages, you can grow healthy, versatile barley naturally, work with its unique low-input and stress-tolerant nature, and harvest a valuable crop for food, feed, or malt without using any chemicals.
`,
                  },
        water: 'Low', 
        temp: '12-15°C', 
        duration: '90-120 days', 
        soil: 'Clay soil', 
        fertilizer: 'NPK 80:40:40', 
        yield: '2-2.5 tons/ha' 
      }
    ],
    sandy: [
      { 
        id: 28, 
        name: 'Groundnut', 
        image: cropImages.groundnut, 
        titleDescription: 'Rabi groundnut in sandy soils produces high-quality kernels with irrigation support, utilizing the soil\'s excellent drainage and aeration for peg penetration.',
        description: {
          stage1: `Land Preparation
Groundnut sends its pods into the soil to mature. If the soil is hard or forms a crust, the pegs cannot enter and you will get empty pods. The land must be prepared with this in mind.

Step 1.1: Choose the Right Soil
Groundnut needs soil that is loose and well-drained. It does not like waterlogging at all. If water stands in the field, the pods will rot. Choose a field with deep soil that is not too heavy with clay.

Step 1.2: Deep Ploughing but Not Too Fine
Plough the field deeply to break any hard pans. However, do not over-plough to make the soil very fine powder. Groundnut actually prefers a little firmness in the seedbed. The goal is loose soil below for roots and pods, but slightly firm soil above for the seed to sit properly.

Step 1.3: Add Well-Rotted Manure Only
Add farmyard manure or compost during land preparation. But the manure must be very well decomposed. Fresh or half-rotten manure can cause the pods to rot later because it continues to decompose and generates heat. Spread the manure and mix it well into the soil.

Step 1.4: Form Flat Beds or Ridges
Depending on your soil and water, prepare either flat beds or shallow ridges. In heavy soil, ridges are better so water does not collect around the base. In light soil, flat beds are fine. The surface should be smooth and level.
`,
          stage2: `Seed Selection and Treatment
Groundnut seed is the kernel inside the pod. The seed is living and must be handled carefully. Damaged seeds will not germinate well.

Step 2.1: Select Whole Pods or Kernels Carefully
If you are saving your own seed, select pods from healthy plants only. The pods should be well-filled, not shriveled. If you are buying seed, get certified seed of a variety that does well in your area.

Step 2.2: Shell Only When Planting
Do not shell the pods too far in advance. Shell the groundnuts only a day or two before planting. Once shelled, the seed loses moisture and vigor quickly. Shell carefully by hand or with a gentle machine so the seed coat (the thin red or pink skin) does not peel off or crack. If the seed coat is damaged, the seed may rot.

Step 2.3: Treat with Rhizobium (The Most Important Step)
Groundnut has a special relationship with bacteria called Rhizobium that live on its roots. These bacteria take nitrogen from the air and give it to the plant. In return, the plant gives the bacteria food. This is called nitrogen fixation.

Even if your soil has Rhizobium naturally, it is always good to treat the seeds with a fresh Rhizobium culture before planting. This ensures millions of the right bacteria are right there on the seed, ready to infect the roots and form nodules.

Purchase the correct Rhizobium culture for groundnut.

Make a sugar solution or use gum arabic as a sticker.

Mix the culture with the sticker and coat the seeds gently.

Dry the seeds in shade for a short time and plant immediately.

Do not mix treated seeds with bare hands for long; the bacteria are living things.

Step 2.4: Trichoderma Treatment for Seed Rot
Groundnut seeds can rot in the soil if conditions are wet or cold. Treat the seeds with Trichoderma, a friendly fungus that protects against rotting fungi. This can be mixed with the Rhizobium treatment, but check the compatibility of the products.

Step 2.5: Treat with Cow Dung Slurry
A traditional method is to soak the seeds in a thin slurry of cow dung and water overnight. This provides a coating that protects the seed and gives it a little food at germination. This can be done along with Rhizobium treatment.
`,
          stage3: `Planting
Step 3.1: Plant at the Right Time for Pegging
Groundnut needs warm weather but also needs moisture at the time of pegging (when the flower stalk bends and enters the soil). If you plant too early or too late, the pegging stage may hit a dry spell and the pods will not form. Time your planting so that the pegging stage gets moisture.

Step 3.2: Plant at Correct Depth
Plant the seeds at a medium depth, not too shallow and not too deep. A depth of about two inches is generally good. If planted too deep, the seedling struggles to emerge. If too shallow, the seed may dry out or be eaten by birds.

Step 3.3: Maintain Spacing for Pegging
Give the plants enough space. If they are too crowded, the pegs will tangle and many will not enter the soil. The spacing depends on your variety. Bushy varieties need more space. The rows should be wide enough for you to move and do weeding without disturbing the pegs later.

Step 3.4: Do Not Plant Too Thick
Unlike maize where you plant a little thicker to account for losses, groundnut should be planted at the recommended spacing. Overcrowding leads to more disease and less pod formation.
`,
          stage4: `Field Management During Growth
Groundnut grows through stages: first the seedling, then vegetative growth, then flowering and pegging, and finally pod filling. Each stage needs specific care.

Step 4.1: Weed Management in the First Month
Groundnut cannot compete with weeds in the first month, especially until the canopy covers the ground. Weeds will steal light, water, and nutrients.

Do the first weeding about three weeks after sowing, before the weeds get big.

Use a hoe or cultivator carefully. Do not go too deep near the plants, as you may damage young roots.

Do a second weeding before the plants start flowering heavily. Once pegging starts, you must stop all deep cultivation.

Step 4.2: The Critical Pegging Stage
When the plant flowers, the flower stalk elongates and bends down to enter the soil. This is called a peg. The peg must actually penetrate the soil to form a pod. This is a unique feature of groundnut.

Stop all soil disturbance once pegging starts. If you hoe or cultivate now, you will cut the pegs and lose the pods.

If the soil surface becomes hard and crusted, the pegs cannot enter. Light irrigation or light mulching can help keep the surface soft.

Earthing up is not done in groundnut like in sugarcane or maize. You do not pull soil to the plants. You leave the soil surface smooth so pegs can enter easily.

Step 4.3: Water Management at Pegging
The pegging stage is the most water-sensitive. If the soil is too dry at this time, the pegs will not enter, or the young pods will abort. Ensure there is sufficient moisture in the soil when the flowers appear and the pegs start forming.

Give water if there is no rain during flowering and pegging.

Do not flood the field. Just moisten the soil.

After the pods have entered and started filling, you can reduce water slightly, but do not let the soil become bone dry.

Step 4.4: Gypsum Application at Flowering
Groundnut needs calcium for pod development, but here is the special part: the pod absorbs calcium directly from the soil through its shell. Calcium does not move from the leaves to the pods. So the calcium must be present in the soil where the pods are forming.

At the start of flowering, before pegging begins, apply gypsum (a natural mineral) on top of the soil around the plants.

The gypsum supplies calcium to the developing pods. This is a critical step for getting well-filled pods, not empty shells.

Gypsum also supplies sulfur, which groundnut needs.

Step 4.5: Managing Leaf Spots
Groundnut is very prone to leaf spots. These are fungal diseases that cause spots on leaves, leading to defoliation (leaves falling early). If leaves fall, the plant cannot fill the pods.

4.5.1. Look for Spots Early
Walk through the field regularly. Look at the lower leaves first. If you see small spots with yellow halos, leaf spot has started.

4.5.2. Preventive Sprays
Once leaf spot starts, it spreads fast. Preventive measures are better.

Spray a solution of sour buttermilk and water. Buttermilk contains beneficial microbes that can suppress leaf spot fungi. Spraying this at intervals after flowering helps keep leaves healthy.

Spray neem-based solutions. Neem has fungicidal properties.

If you have access to Trichoderma, you can spray a Trichoderma solution on the leaves. Trichoderma can also fight leaf spot fungi.

4.5.3. Keep Air Moving
If the crop is too dense, air does not circulate and humidity stays high, encouraging leaf spot. Proper spacing at planting helps prevent this.

Step 4.6: Pest Management

4.6.1. Aphids and Rosette Disease
Aphids are small insects that suck sap from tender shoots. In groundnut, they are dangerous because they transmit a virus called Rosette. Rosette disease stunts the plant and can cause complete yield loss.

Watch for aphids on the growing tips and under leaves.

If you see aphids, spray neem solution or garlic-chilli solution to control them.

Remove any plant that shows Rosette symptoms (yellow, stunted, bushy appearance) immediately and destroy it. This stops the disease from spreading to healthy plants.

4.6.2. Termites
Termites can damage roots and also bore into pods, making holes. These holes let in fungi that produce aflatoxin.

Incorporate crop residues into the soil well before planting. As they decompose, they produce heat that repels termites.

Healthy, vigorous plants resist termite attack better.

If termite mounds are present in the field, they may need to be dealt with by removing the queen, but this is expert work.

4.6.3. Leaf Miner
Sometimes, small caterpillars mine inside the leaves, creating white trails. This reduces the leaf area for photosynthesis.

If you see leaf miner damage, monitor closely. Often, natural predators will control them.

In severe cases, neem spray can help.

Step 4.7: Encouraging Natural Enemies
Avoid any spray that kills beneficial insects. Ladybugs, hoverflies, spiders, and predatory wasps all help control pests in groundnut. If you have flowering plants around your field, these beneficial insects will come and stay.
`,
          stage5: `Harvesting
Harvesting groundnut at the right time is critical. Too early, and the pods are immature and shrivel when dried. Too late, and the pods may sprout in the ground, or be attacked by pests and fungi.

Step 5.1: Know When the Crop is Mature
Unlike other crops, groundnut does not mature all at once. Some pods may be ready while others are still developing. However, you look for general signs:

The leaves turn yellow and the older leaves start to drop.

The inside of the pod shell develops dark markings or color.

The kernels are plump and have the characteristic color of the variety (pink, red, or brown).

You can dig up a few sample plants and check the pods. If most are well-filled and the inside of the shell has darkened, it is time to harvest.

Step 5.2: Check Soil Moisture Before Harvest
If the soil is too dry and hard, the pods will break off and be left in the ground when you pull the plants. If the soil is too wet, the pods will be muddy and stick together. The best time is when the soil is slightly moist but not wet.

Step 5.3: Digging, Not Pulling
Do not just pull the plants by hand, especially in dry soil. The stems may break and the pods will stay in the ground. Use a hoe or a groundnut digger to loosen the soil underneath the plants first. Then lift the plants gently and shake off the soil.

Step 5.4: Stacking for Curing
After lifting, the plants with pods attached are stacked in small piles or placed on racks in the field. The leaves still have moisture and will continue to feed the pods for a short time. This is called curing. Leave them like this for a few days to dry partially.

Step 5.5: Picking the Pods
After curing, pick the pods from the plants. Remove any soil clumps stuck to the pods. Discard any pods that are damaged, diseased, or rotting.
`,
          stage6: `Post-Harvest and Storage
This is the most critical stage for groundnut because of aflatoxin. Aflatoxin is a poison produced by a fungus (Aspergillus) that grows on groundnuts when they are not dried properly or are stored in damp conditions. Aflatoxin is dangerous to humans and animals, and if your groundnuts have high aflatoxin, they will be rejected in the market.

Step 6.1: Dry Immediately and Thoroughly
Drying is the only way to prevent aflatoxin. The fungus cannot grow if the nuts are dry.

Spread the pods in a thin layer on clean mats, tarpaulins, or a clean cemented floor. Never dry directly on bare soil, as soil contains the fungus and adds moisture.

Turn the pods frequently so all sides dry evenly.

Dry in the sun for several days until the pods are completely dry. The kernels inside should rattle when you shake the pod.

Test by biting a kernel. It should be hard and brittle, not soft or chewy.

Step 6.2: Store as Pods, Not Kernels
Groundnuts store much better inside the shell. The pod is a natural protection. If you store as kernels (shelled), they are exposed to air, moisture, and pests, and they will go bad quickly.

Store only fully dried pods.

Do not shell until you are ready to sell, plant, or eat.

Step 6.3: Use Clean Storage Containers
Use clean gunny bags, or better, airtight containers. If using bags, store them on pallets or wooden planks off the ground. Keep them away from walls that may get damp.

Step 6.4: Do Not Mix Old and New
Never mix newly harvested, dried groundnuts with old stock from last year. Any pests or fungus in the old stock will immediately infect the new stock.

Step 6.5: Check Storage Regularly
Check your stored groundnuts every few weeks. Feel for any heat or moisture. Look for any signs of mold (greenish or blackish growth) on pods. If you find mold, you must re-dry the pods in the sun immediately and remove any affected pods.

Step 6.6: Shell Only When Needed
Just before selling or planting, shell the pods. Shelling damages the seed coat slightly, and after shelling, the kernels will not store long. Shell only the quantity you need immediately.

By following these stages, you can grow healthy groundnuts naturally, get well-filled pods, and protect your harvest from the hidden danger of aflatoxin without using any chemicals.
`,
                  },
        water: 'Medium', 
        temp: '20-25°C', 
        duration: '100-120 days', 
        soil: 'Sandy soil', 
        fertilizer: 'NPK 40:60:40', 
        yield: '1.5-2 tons/ha' 
      },
      { 
        id: 29, 
        name: 'Carrot', 
        image: cropImages.carrot, 
        titleDescription: 'Carrot in sandy soils produces straight, well-shaped roots with excellent color and flavor, benefiting from loose soil structure and good drainage.',
        description: {
          stage1: `Land Preparation
Carrots are different from other crops because the harvest grows inside the soil. If the soil is not prepared perfectly, the carrots will be forked, stunted, or misshapen.

Step 1.1: Choose the Right Field
Carrots grow best in deep, loose, well-drained sandy loam soil . The soil must be free of rocks, stones, clods, and any debris that could obstruct the growing root . Heavy clay soils or soils that crust over will produce short, forked, or deformed carrots . The soil pH should be slightly acidic to neutral .

Step 1.2: Deep Soil Preparation
Because carrots will grow deep into the soil, you must prepare the soil deeply. Till or dig the soil to a good depth, loosening it thoroughly . Break up any hard pans or compacted layers below the surface. This creates deep channels for the carrot roots to grow straight down . Some farmers use a chisel plow, keyline plow, or broadfork to achieve this depth .

Step 1.3: Create a Fine, Clod-Free Seedbed
After deep tillage, prepare the soil to a fine tilth . This means breaking all clods into small, fine particles. The seedbed must be smooth and level. Any remaining clods or lumps will cause the carrots to fork or bend as they grow. A rototiller or field cultivator with a crumbling roller can be used to create this fine seedbed .

Step 1.4: Add Organic Matter Carefully
Carrots need organic matter, but it must be well-decomposed. Fresh manure or raw organic matter will cause the roots to fork and grow hairy side roots . Use only well-aged compost or vermicompost, mixed thoroughly into the soil . Some sources recommend avoiding nitrogen-rich materials like fresh manure altogether, as excess nitrogen causes forked roots .

Step 1.5: Consider Raised Beds
In many regions, carrots are planted on raised beds. Raised beds provide deeper loose soil, better drainage, and faster warming in spring . In hills or cooler areas, form raised beds of modest height, with a convenient width and length . In plains, ridges and furrows may be formed at the appropriate spacing .

Step 1.6: Pre-Plant Weed Control
Weeds are a major challenge in carrots because carrots germinate slowly and do not compete well. Before planting, you can use a stale seedbed technique. Prepare the field, water it lightly, and allow weed seeds to germinate. Then use shallow cultivation or flame weeding to kill those tiny weeds just before planting . This gives your carrots a head start.

Step 1-7: Plan Your Rotation
Carrots should not be grown in the same field year after year. They are susceptible to soil-borne diseases and nematodes that build up over time. Follow a crop rotation, planting carrots in the same field only once every few years . Good rotations include following carrots with grains or legumes.
`,
          stage2: `Seed Selection and Treatment
Carrot seeds are small and slow to germinate. Choosing good seed and treating it properly helps ensure a successful stand.

Step 2.1: Choose the Right Variety
There are many types of carrots suited for different purposes and soil types .

Nantes type: Cylindrical, blunt-tipped carrots known for excellent flavor and quality. Good for most conditions .

Danvers type: Conical, thick carrots that are hardy and tolerant of heavier soils .

Chantenay type: Short, stout roots that perform well in shallower or heavier soils .

Imperator type: Long, slender carrots with high sugar content. These need the deepest, loosest soil .

Paris Market type: Round, palm-sized carrots that grow well in poor or rocky soil .

Choose a variety suited to your soil type and market. For hills, varieties like Ooty-1, Early Nantes, and New Koroda are recommended. For plains, India Gold, Pusa Kesar, and Half Long Danvers are suitable .

Step 2.2: Obtain Quality Seed
Use fresh seed from a reliable source. Carrot seed viability declines with age. Organic farmers must use untreated seed or certified organic seed . Pelleted seed is available and makes precision seeding easier, but ensure any coating is approved for organic production .

Step 2.3: Speed Up Germination
Carrot seeds are slow to germinate, taking up to three weeks . To speed up germination, you can soak the seeds in water for several hours or overnight before planting . This hydrates the seed and gives it a head start.

Step 2.4: Treat Seeds with Trichoderma
To protect young seedlings from soil-borne diseases, treat the seeds with Trichoderma viride powder, a friendly fungus. Mix the seeds with a 5% Trichoderma solution before sowing . This is an effective organic seed treatment.

Step 2.5: Cow Pat Pit Treatment
A traditional biodynamic treatment is to soak the seeds in cow pat pit solution. Prepare a solution of cow pat pit in water and soak the seeds for a full day before sowing . This is believed to enhance germination and plant health.

Step 2.6: Mix Seeds with Sand for Even Sowing
Because carrot seeds are tiny and difficult to sow evenly, mix the seeds with sand before planting. A common practice is to mix one part seed with several parts sand . This helps distribute the seeds more uniformly along the row.
`,
          stage3: `Planting
Carrots are always direct-seeded. They do not transplant well because disturbing the root causes forking.

Step 3.1: Plant at the Right Time
Carrots are a cool-season crop . In plains, the recommended sowing time is during the cooler months, often August . In hills at higher elevations, carrots can be grown throughout the year with assured irrigation . At medium elevations, sowing from July to February is suitable . Soil temperatures for germination should be cool but not freezing .

Step 3.2: Prepare Rows or Beds
Mark rows with the appropriate spacing between them . For raised beds, you can create multiple lines per bed . Ensure the soil surface is smooth and fine.

Step 3.3: Sow Seeds at Proper Depth
Sow carrot seeds shallowly. The recommended depth is about half an inch, or just enough to cover the seeds with fine soil . In heavy soils or cold weather, plant shallower. In sandy soils or warm weather, you can plant slightly deeper . Do not plant too deep, or the seeds may not emerge.

Step 3.4: Sow at Proper Density
Sow seeds at a density that will give you a good stand without excessive crowding. A common rate is a certain amount of seed per area . Many farmers sow a little thicker to account for poor germination, then thin later. Precision seeders are valuable tools for achieving uniform spacing and avoiding the need for thinning .

Step 3.5: Cover Seeds Gently
Cover the seeds lightly with fine soil or compost . Do not pack the soil down heavily. The goal is good seed-to-soil contact without creating a crust.

Step 3.6: Keep Soil Moist During Germination
Consistent moisture is essential for uniform emergence . Carrots take one to three weeks to germinate, and the soil must remain moist during this entire period . If the soil surface dries out or forms a crust, the seeds will not emerge. Water gently with a fine spray to avoid washing seeds away . Some farmers cover the seeded area with paper, fabric, or row covers to conserve moisture and prevent crusting .

Step 3.7: Use Row Covers
In cooler regions or for early plantings, floating row covers can be used to protect young seedlings and speed growth .
`,
          stage4: `Field Management During Growth
Carrots need careful attention, especially in the first few weeks.

Step 4.1: Thinning
When the seedlings are a few inches tall, they must be thinned . Overcrowded carrots will be small and twisted. Thin to the proper spacing between plants . For hills, a wider spacing may be used; for plains, a closer spacing is common . Thinning can be done by pulling the extra seedlings, or by clipping the tops with scissors to avoid disturbing the roots of the remaining plants .

Step 4.2: Water Management
Consistent moisture is critical for carrots. Fluctuations in watering cause cracking, poor quality, and rough roots .

Germination and Early Growth: Keep soil evenly moist.

Root Development: As roots enlarge, water less often but more deeply to encourage roots to grow downward .

Later Growth: Toward maturity, reduce watering slightly, but do not let the soil become bone dry.

Amount: Carrots need a consistent supply of water throughout the season . Drip irrigation or overhead irrigation can be used, but if using overhead, water early in the day so foliage dries before night .

Step 4.3: Mulching
Apply a thin layer of organic mulch such as straw, dried leaves, or grass clippings around the seedlings after thinning . Mulch:

Conserves soil moisture.

Suppresses weeds.

Regulates soil temperature.

Prevents soil from crusting.

Keeps the carrot shoulders from turning green if they protrude from the soil .

Step 4.4: Weed Management
Weeds are the biggest challenge in organic carrots because carrots are slow to germinate and do not compete well . A combination of methods is needed.

Pre-Plant Stale Seedbed: As described earlier, this gives a head start.

Flame Weeding: Some farmers use flame weeders just before carrots emerge, killing weed seedlings without disturbing the soil .

Mechanical Cultivation: Use shallow cultivation between rows with basket weeders, tine weeders, or small hoes . Be careful not to damage carrot roots.

Hand Weeding: Inevitably, some hand weeding will be needed to remove weeds growing close to the carrots .

Step 4.5: Earthing Up
On the day of thinning, usually about a month after sowing, earthing up should be done . This means pulling a little soil up around the base of the plants to cover any exposed shoulders. If carrot shoulders are exposed to light, they will turn green and become bitter.

Step 4.6: Nutrition and Feeding
Carrots are light to moderate feeders . Excess nitrogen causes lush tops but forked, hairy roots .

Basal Dressing: The compost and organic amendments added at planting provide most of the needed nutrients .

Biofertilizers: Azospirillum and Phosphobacteria can be applied at the time of land preparation to enhance nutrient availability .

Liquid Feeds: During growth, foliar sprays of panchagavya, vermiwash, or other liquid organic fertilizers can be applied at intervals to boost plant health and root development .

Horn Silica: A biodynamic preparation called horn silica can be sprayed later in the season to increase yield and quality .

Step 4.7: Pest Management
Carrots are not heavily attacked by pests, but some problems can occur .

4.7.1. Carrot Rust Fly
This is a common pest whose larvae tunnel into the roots. Use floating row covers to physically exclude the adult flies . Practice crop rotation.

4.7.2. Aphids
Small insects that cluster on new growth. Spray with a strong stream of water, insecticidal soap, or neem oil .

4.7.3. Nematodes (Root Knot)
These microscopic worms cause galls on roots, stunting plants and reducing quality.

Crop Rotation: Do not plant carrots in the same field more than once every few years .

Marigold: Growing marigold in the field once every two years helps suppress nematodes .

Neem Cake: Application of neem cake at sowing time helps control nematodes .

Paecilomyces: Application of the beneficial fungus Paecilomyces lilacinus before sowing can also help .

Step 4.8: Disease Management

4.8.1. Leaf Spot
Fungal leaf spots can affect carrot foliage.

Prevention: Ensure good air circulation and avoid wetting leaves.

Trichoderma and Pseudomonas: Application of Trichoderma viride and Pseudomonas fluorescens at land preparation helps suppress soil-borne diseases .

Botanical Sprays: Foliar sprays of Manchurian tea filtrates or Dasagavya at intervals from one month after sowing can help control leaf spot .

4.8.2. Fungal Diseases in Storage
Proper curing and storage conditions prevent post-harvest rots. Ensure carrots are dry before storage and maintain high humidity with good air circulation.
`,
          stage5: `Harvesting
Carrots can be harvested at any size, from baby carrots to full maturity.

Step 5.1: Know When to Harvest
Carrots are usually ready for harvest two to three months after sowing, depending on the variety and growing conditions . The best harvest period for optimal taste and texture lasts about a few weeks . After that, roots may lose quality.

Step 5.2: Check for Maturity
To check if carrots are ready, brush aside the soil at the base of the leaves and look at the shoulder (top) of the root. It should be the expected size and color for your variety . Refer to your seed packet for the mature size.

Step 5.3: Harvest on Time
Carrots harvested after a light frost are often sweeter . However, do not leave them in the ground too long after maturity, or they may become woody or crack.

Step 5.4: Loosen the Soil First
Before pulling, loosen the soil gently with a digging fork or hand fork . Insert the fork away from the row to avoid piercing the roots. Then grasp the carrot at the base of the greens and pull gently.

Step 5.5: Handle with Care
Carrots bruise easily. Handle them gently. Do not throw or drop them. Remove the green tops soon after harvest, as the leaves continue to draw moisture from the root, causing wilting.

Step 5.6: Harvest in Cool Conditions
Harvest in the cool of the morning if possible, and keep harvested carrots out of direct sun to prevent wilting.
`,
          stage6: `Post-Harvest and Storage
Step 6.1: Remove Tops
Cut or twist off the green tops, leaving a small amount of stem if desired. Tops left on will cause the carrots to wilt rapidly .

Step 6.2: Sort and Grade
Sort carrots by size, shape, and quality. Remove any that are forked, cracked, misshapen, or damaged. Uniform, straight, brightly colored carrots will fetch the best price.

Step 6.3: Washing
Carrots can be sold dirty or washed. Washing improves appearance but can sometimes lead to decay if the carrots are bruised . If washing, use clean water, and dry them thoroughly before storage. Some growers wash only just before sale.

Step 6.4: Cool Immediately
Prompt post-harvest cooling is essential for long-term storage . Cool carrots as quickly as possible after harvest to remove field heat.

Step 6.5: Storage Conditions
Carrots store best at very cool temperatures with extremely high humidity . Under ideal conditions, they can last for several months . They are generally stored in sealed plastic bags or containers to conserve moisture . For shorter storage, they can be kept in the refrigerator crisper drawer for several weeks .

Step 6.6: Alternative Storage Methods
For longer storage without refrigeration, carrots can be layered in damp sand in a cool, root cellar-like environment . They can also be dried or frozen for preservation .

Step 6.7: Check Stored Carrots
If storing for long periods, check periodically for any signs of rot and remove affected roots promptly.

By following these stages, you can grow sweet, straight, healthy carrots naturally, manage the unique challenges of root crop production, and harvest a bountiful crop without using any chemicals.
`,
                  },
        water: 'Medium', 
        temp: '15-20°C', 
        duration: '90-110 days', 
        soil: 'Sandy soil', 
        fertilizer: 'NPK 60:80:80', 
        yield: '20-25 tons/ha' 
      },
      { 
        id: 30, 
        name: 'Onion', 
        image: cropImages.onion, 
        titleDescription: 'Onion in sandy soils produces well-shaped bulbs with good storage quality, utilizing the soil\'s excellent drainage for healthy bulb development.',
        description: {
          stage1: `Land Preparation
Onions have shallow roots and need soil that is loose, fertile, and free from weeds. Getting the land ready properly is the foundation of a successful crop.

Step 1.1: Choose the Right Field
Onions grow best in well-drained, friable (easily crumbled) soil with a high content of organic matter . The soil should be loose and sandy loam, not heavy clay . The pH should be neutral to slightly acidic . Most importantly, the field must have good drainage. Onions cannot tolerate waterlogging, which causes rot.

Step 1.2: Plan Your Rotation
Onions should not follow other members of the allium family, such as garlic, shallots, or previous onion crops . This is because pests and diseases like thrips and rot can overwinter in the soil and attack the new crop. Practice a rotation of several years between allium crops .

Step 1.3: Prepare the Soil the Year Before
Ideally, begin soil preparation the year before planting. Use cover crops and compost to build soil health and organic matter . This gives the organic matter time to break down and integrate with the soil.

Step 1.4: Add Organic Matter and Amendments
Before planting, spread well-decomposed farmyard manure or compost over the field and mix it into the soil . Research has shown that using organic manures like farmyard manure, vermicompost, and liquid manures significantly improves onion growth and yield . If a soil test shows deficiencies, you can add natural amendments like lime to adjust pH, gypsum for calcium, or potassium sulfate for potassium . Avoid fresh manure, as it can cause rot .

Step 1.5: Create a Fine, Firm Seedbed
Onion seeds are small, and the plants have shallow roots. Prepare the soil to a fine tilth, breaking all clods. The seedbed must be smooth and level. For direct-seeded onions, a fine seedbed is essential for good germination.

Step 1.6: Form Raised Beds
In many regions, onions are planted on raised beds. Raised beds improve drainage, allow the soil to warm up faster in spring, and prevent compaction . The beds can be covered with plastic mulch for even better results, especially in cooler areas .

Step 1.7: Pre-Plant Weed Control
Weeds are a major challenge in onions. Before planting, you can use a stale seedbed technique. Prepare the field, water it lightly, and allow weed seeds to germinate. Then use shallow cultivation to kill those tiny weeds just before planting . This gives your onions a head start.
`,
          stage2: `Seed Selection and Treatment
Choosing the right variety and healthy seed is critical for onion success.

Step 2.1: Understand Day Length Requirements
Onions are classified by day length :

Short-day onions: Best for warm, southern regions with mild winters. They form bulbs when day length reaches a certain number of hours.

Long-day onions: Ideal for cooler, northern regions with long summer days. They need a higher number of daylight hours to form bulbs.

Intermediate-day onions: Adaptable to many regions in between.
If you plant the wrong type for your area, you will get either no bulbs or very small ones. Green onions (bunching onions) can be grown at any latitude because they are harvested before bulb formation .

Step 2.2: Choose Your Propagation Method
Onions can be grown from seeds, transplants, or sets (small bulbs) .

Seeds: Cheapest, widest variety choice, but take longer to mature.

Transplants: Started indoors and then moved to the field. Give a head start and more uniform crop.

Sets: Easy to plant and mature quickly, but more expensive and limited variety choice.

Step 2.3: Obtain Quality Propagation Material
Use certified seed or transplants from a reliable source . If you are growing from sets, obtain them from a reputable supplier. Do not use supermarket onions for planting, as they may be from a different region or treated with sprout inhibitors .

Step 2.4: Treat Seeds for Disease Prevention
To protect young seedlings from soil-borne diseases, you can treat the seeds with Trichoderma, a friendly fungus. For bacterial diseases, some growers use hot water treatment on seeds . If you are using transplants, you can drench the trays with a solution of beneficial microbes like Streptomyces before transplanting to prevent pathogens .

Step 2.5: Start Seeds Indoors (for Transplants)
If growing transplants, start seeds in greenhouses or protected areas using cell plug trays . Use a fine growing medium. Keep them warm for good germination. When seedlings are growing, if they show nutrient deficiency, feed with an organic liquid fertilizer . If the tops get too tall and flop over, you can clip them back—this is called giving them a "haircut" .

Step 2.6: Harden Off Transplants
Before transplanting, plants must be hardened off. This means gradually exposing them to outdoor conditions for about a week, reducing water slightly, and allowing them to toughen up . Lush, soft plants do not perform well in the field .
`,
          stage3: `Planting
Step 3.1: Plant at the Right Time
The planting time depends on your method and region.

Seeds: Start indoors several weeks before the last frost . Direct seed in early spring or late winter.

Transplants: Plant in early spring as soon as the soil can be worked .

Sets: Plant in early spring.
In warm regions, onions can be planted in autumn for a spring harvest .

Step 3.2: Space Plants Properly
Proper spacing is essential for good bulb size. Onions cannot be given too much space—if spaced too far apart, they become very large but have a higher incidence of bacterial rot .

Between rows: Generally 12 to 18 inches apart .

Between plants: For individual transplants, about 4 inches apart . For clumps of multiple seedlings, space clumps about 9 inches apart . For sets, space 4-6 inches apart .
Green onions grown for bunching can be spaced closer, about 1-2 inches apart .

Step 3.3: Plant at the Correct Depth
Plant transplants and sets at the correct depth. Do not plant too deep. The base of the plant should be at soil level, with the roots covered. If planted too deep, the bulb may not form properly or may rot . For sets, plant about an inch deep with the tip just showing .

Step 3.4: Use Plastic Mulch (Optional)
Planting in plastic mulch can increase onion yields . The plastic warms the soil earlier in spring, leading to bigger onions. Drip irrigation can be used along with the mulch to improve soil moisture. Some growers use plastic with a silver strip to repel thrips .

Step 3.5: Water Immediately After Planting
After transplanting or planting sets, water thoroughly to settle the soil around the roots and eliminate air pockets.
`,
          stage4: `Field Management During Growth
Onions need consistent care, especially with water and weed control.

Step 4.1: Water Management
Onions need a continuous supply of moisture when actively growing .

Young Plants: Keep soil consistently moist to help them establish .

Bulb Formation: As bulbs begin to swell, maintain even moisture. Fluctuations in watering can cause cracking or poor development.

Late Season: When onions start to mature and the tops begin to fall over (lodge), reduce watering and then stop completely about one to two weeks before harvest . This helps prevent rot and improves storage quality.

Method: Drip irrigation is best because it delivers water to the roots without wetting the foliage, reducing disease .

Step 4.2: Mulching
Apply organic mulch like straw, dried leaves, or grass clippings around the plants . Mulch:

Conserves soil moisture.

Suppresses weeds, which is critical for onions.

Keeps the soil cool.

Prevents soil from splashing onto the plants, reducing soil-borne diseases .
For plastic mulch, ensure that the holes around the plants are wide enough so the plastic does not touch and burn the onions .

Step 4.3: Weed Management
Weeds are the biggest challenge in onion production because onions are poor competitors .

Early Control: Use shallow cultivation with a basket weeder, wheel hoe, or finger weeders when weeds are small . This is most effective before weeds emerge.

Hand Weeding: Remove weeds that grow close to the onion plants by hand .

Mulch: A thick layer of organic mulch suppresses most weeds.

Step 4.4: Nutrition and Feeding
Onions are heavy feeders, especially during leaf growth .

Basal Dressing: The compost and organic amendments added at planting provide a good base.

Liquid Feeds: During growth, apply liquid organic fertilizers like compost tea, liquid seaweed, or fermented plant juices every few weeks . Some farmers spray the leaves with liquid fish or seaweed fertilizers, but this should be done before the fourth or fifth leaf, using a spreader sticker to help it stick to the waxy leaves .

Stop Nitrogen at Bulbing: Do not apply nitrogen when the bulbs are beginning to enlarge. Excess nitrogen at this stage encourages leafy growth at the expense of bulb size and can increase disease pressure .

Step 4.5: Pest Management

*4.5.1. Onion Thrips - The Most Serious Pest*
Thrips are tiny insects that rasp the leaves, causing silvery patches and reducing yield. They are the main pest of onions .

Prevention: Use silver reflective mulch to repel thrips . Plant away from garlic fields where thrips may overwinter .

Monitoring: Check plants regularly. Act when pest pressure is still low.

Organic Controls: Use spinosad-based products, Beauveria bassiana (a beneficial fungus), or mineral oil sprays . These products require direct contact with the pest, so spray at night when thrips are active. Repeat applications every few days as needed . Neem oil can also help .

4.5.2. Onion Maggots
These are fly larvae that tunnel into the bulbs.

Prevention: Use floating row covers to physically exclude the adult flies . Practice long crop rotations.

4.5.3. Cutworms
These caterpillars cut young seedlings at the base.

Control: Remove mulch from around affected plants to expose them to predators. Hand-pick if seen.

4.5.4. Allium Leaf Miners
These pests tunnel in leaves and bulbs.

Control: Follow local guidance on when to use exclusion netting to prevent infestation .

Step 4.6: Disease Management

Disease prevention is the goal. Healthy, unstressed plants are less susceptible.

4.6.1. Prevention Practices

Crop Rotation: Long rotations of several years are essential .

Good Air Flow: Proper spacing and weed control allow air to circulate, reducing humidity.

Water Management: Avoid overhead irrigation late in the season. Keep foliage dry .

Sanitation: Remove and destroy diseased plant material. Do not compost it .

Resistant Varieties: Choose disease-resistant varieties when possible.

4.6.2. Fungal Diseases (Purple Blotch, Downy Mildew, Botrytis, Powdery Mildew)
These cause spots on leaves and can kill foliage, reducing yield . Purple blotch is worse in warm, humid conditions on plants weakened by thrips .

Control: Follow all prevention practices above. Keep thrips under control. If necessary, use approved organic fungicides like copper or sulfur-based products, but use them carefully.

4.6.3. Bacterial Diseases (Bacterial Bulb Rot, Xanthomonas Leaf Blight)
These cause rotting of the bulb, often developing between harvest and storage .

Prevention: Avoid damage to onions during harvest. Do not top onions prematurely. If topping is necessary, wait until most tops have lodged and leave a good length of stem above the bulb . Avoid excessive nitrogen and low plant populations, which increase disease pressure. Harvest when onions are fully mature .
`,
          stage5: `Harvesting
Onions can be harvested at two stages: as green onions (with tops) or as mature, cured bulbs.

Step 5.1: Harvesting Green Onions
Green onions (scallions) are harvested when the tops are green and the bulbs are small, about pencil size to half an inch in diameter . They are ready as soon as they reach edible size . Harvest by pulling them gently, grabbing low on the stem to avoid crushing the greens . Clean off any yellow leaves, and trim the roots .

Step 5.2: Harvesting Mature Bulbs
Mature onions are ready to harvest when the tops turn yellow, dry, and fall over naturally (lodge) . This usually occurs when a large percentage of the leaves have lodged . The bulbs should be firm and have the characteristic size and color for the variety.

Step 5.3: Harvest with Care
On a dry day, gently loosen the soil with a fork or shovel, then pull the onions out by the tops. Handle them carefully to avoid bruising or damaging the bulbs, as damage leads to rot in storage .

Step 5.4: Field Curing
After harvest, leave the onions in the field or move them to a dry, shaded, well-ventilated area to cure . Spread them in a single layer, with the tops still attached. Curing allows the outer skins to dry and tighten, and the neck to seal, which protects the bulb during storage. Cure for one to three weeks, depending on weather and humidity .

Step 5.5: Topping
After curing, the roots and tops can be trimmed. Cut the roots close to the bulb, and cut the tops back, leaving about an inch of stem . For green onions, roots are trimmed to about half an inch .
`,
          stage6: `Post-Harvest and Storage
Step 6.1: Sort and Grade
Sort onions by size and quality. Remove any with thick necks (which indicate they are not fully mature and will not store well), soft bulbs, or signs of rot. Uniform, firm, well-cured onions store best and fetch the best price.

Step 6.2: Storage Conditions
Onions store best in a cool, dry, and well-ventilated area .

Temperature: Cool but not freezing, ideally around 32-40°F .

Humidity: Low to moderate humidity, around 60-70% .

Containers: Use mesh bags, baskets, or cardboard boxes that allow air circulation . Do not store in plastic bags, which trap moisture.

Step 6.3: Protect from Ethylene
Keep onions away from fruits and vegetables that produce ethylene gas, such as apples and pears, as this can cause onions to sprout or spoil .

Step 6.4: Check Stored Onions
Periodically check stored onions and remove any that show signs of sprouting or rot to prevent spread to the rest of the crop.

Step 6.5: Saving Seed
If you want to save onion seeds, you need to allow some bulbs to overwinter and replant them in the spring. They will flower and produce seed in their second year. This is an advanced technique best left to experienced growers.

By following these stages, you can grow healthy, flavorful onions naturally, manage the unique challenges of day length, thrips, and diseases, and harvest a bountiful crop that stores well without using any chemicals.
`,
                  },
        water: 'Medium', 
        temp: '13-25°C', 
        duration: '100-120 days', 
        soil: 'Sandy soil', 
        fertilizer: 'NPK 80:60:80', 
        yield: '15-20 tons/ha' 
      },
      { 
        id: 31, 
        name: 'Radish', 
        image: cropImages.radish, 
        titleDescription: 'Radish in sandy soils produces crisp, tender roots with mild flavor, utilizing loose soil structure for rapid, uniform root development without forking.',
        description: {
          stage1: `Land Preparation
Radishes need loose, friable soil that allows the roots to expand without restriction. They grow so fast that there is little time to correct problems after planting.

Step 1.1: Choose the Right Field
Radishes grow best in well-drained, loose, sandy loam soil that is rich in organic matter . The soil should be deep and free of rocks, clods, and any debris that could cause the roots to fork or become misshapen . Heavy clay soils or compacted soils will produce rough, forked, or stunted radishes . The ideal pH is slightly acidic to neutral .

Step 1.2: Understand That Radishes Are Undemanding
Radishes are not heavy feeders and do not need extremely rich soil. In fact, too much nitrogen can cause lush leafy growth at the expense of root development . However, they do need soil that is loose and well-prepared.

Step 1.3: Prepare the Soil Shallowly
Because radishes grow so quickly and have shallow roots, deep tillage is not always necessary . Prepare the soil to a fine tilth, breaking all clods, but only to the depth that the roots will grow. For round varieties, this is shallower; for long varieties, deeper. A fine seedbed is essential for uniform germination.

Step 1.4: Add Organic Matter Carefully
Add well-decomposed compost or aged manure to the soil, but ensure it is thoroughly mixed . Fresh manure or raw organic matter can cause forked roots . The organic matter helps retain moisture, which is critical for fast, even growth.

Step 1.5: Remove All Obstructions
Before planting, carefully remove any stones, large clods, or pieces of crop residue from the soil. Even a small stone can cause a radish root to split or fork .

Step 1.6: Level the Seedbed
Rake the soil smooth and level. A level surface ensures that all seeds are planted at the same depth and emerge together.

Step 1.7: Plan for Succession Planting
Radishes mature quickly and do not store well in the ground. To have a continuous supply, plan to plant small amounts every week or two, rather than one large planting .
`,
          stage2: ` Seed Selection and Treatment
Radish seeds are relatively large and easy to handle. Choosing the right variety and using fresh seed is important.

Step 2.1: Choose the Right Variety
There are many types of radishes, suited for different seasons and purposes .

Spring/Summer Varieties: These are quick-maturing, small, and mild. They are best planted in cool weather of spring and fall . They do not do well in hot weather, which makes them pungent and pithy .

Winter Varieties: These are larger, slower-growing, and can be stored for months. They are planted in late summer for fall harvest .

Daikon or Oriental Radishes: Very large, long white roots used in Asian cooking. They need deep, loose soil.

Specialty Varieties: Radishes come in many colors, including red, white, purple, pink, and black.

Choose a variety suited to your season and your market. For example, in hills, varieties like Japanese White, Pusa Himani, and Chinese Pink are suitable. In plains, Pusa Desi, Pusa Chetki, and Pusa Reshmi are recommended .

Step 2.2: Use Fresh Seed
Radish seeds lose viability over time. Use fresh seed from a reliable source for best germination.

Step 2.3: Treat Seeds with Trichoderma
To protect young seedlings from soil-borne diseases, treat the seeds with Trichoderma powder, a friendly fungus. Moisten the seeds slightly, then add the powder and mix until all seeds are coated. Plant them as soon as possible after treatment.

Step 2.4: Soak Seeds for Faster Germination
Radish seeds germinate quickly, but you can speed up the process by soaking them in water for a few hours before planting . This is not necessary but can be helpful in dry conditions.

Step 2.5: Mix with Sand for Even Sowing
Radish seeds are small. To sow them more evenly, you can mix the seeds with sand or fine soil before planting . This helps prevent overcrowding.
`,
          stage3: `Planting
Radishes are always direct-seeded. They do not transplant well because disturbing the root causes forking.

Step 3.1: Plant at the Right Time
Radishes are a cool-season crop .

Spring: Plant as soon as the soil can be worked in early spring, several weeks before the last frost .

Fall: Plant in late summer or early fall, as the weather cools.

Summer: In hot climates, avoid planting in mid-summer, as heat causes poor quality .

Winter: In mild climates, radishes can be grown throughout winter .

Soil temperature for good germination should be cool but not freezing. Radish seeds will germinate in cold soil, but slowly.

Step 3.2: Sow Seeds Shallowly
Plant radish seeds at a shallow depth, about half an inch deep . In heavy soils or cool weather, plant shallower. In sandy soils or warm weather, you can plant slightly deeper. Cover them lightly with fine soil.

Step 3.3: Space Seeds Properly
Proper spacing is critical for good root development. If radishes are too crowded, they will not form good roots.

Between Rows: Space rows about 6 to 12 inches apart, depending on the variety .

Between Seeds: Sow seeds about an inch apart in the row . Later, you will thin them to the final spacing.

For large winter radishes or daikon, give them more space, about 4 to 6 inches between plants.

Step 3.4: Sow at the Right Density
Because radish seeds are small, it is easy to sow them too thickly. Try to sow them thinly and evenly. A common recommendation is to plant a certain number of seeds per foot of row .

Step 3.5: Cover and Firm the Soil
After sowing, cover the seeds gently with soil and firm it lightly to ensure good seed-to-soil contact. Do not pack it down hard.

Step 3.6: Water Gently
Water the seeded area gently with a fine spray to avoid washing the seeds away. Keep the soil consistently moist until seeds germinate, which usually takes only a few days to a week .
`,
          stage4: `Field Management During Growth
Radishes grow so fast that there is very little time for management. However, the short growth period means you must be attentive.

Step 4.1: Water Management
Consistent moisture is critical for radishes. Fluctuations in watering cause the roots to become tough, pungent, or to crack .

Germination: Keep soil evenly moist until seedlings emerge.

Growth: Water regularly to maintain even moisture. Do not let the soil dry out completely.

Method: A gentle spray or drip irrigation is best. Avoid heavy overhead watering that can compact the soil.
Radishes need about an inch of water per week from rain or irrigation .

Step 4.2: Thinning
Thinning is the most important management practice for radishes. If radishes are too crowded, they will not form good roots .

When to Thin: Thin the seedlings when they are about an inch tall, soon after they have their first true leaves .

How to Thin: Pull out the extra seedlings, leaving the strongest ones at the proper spacing. For small radishes, final spacing should be about an inch or two apart . For larger varieties, give them more space.

Use Thinnings: The thinned seedlings can be eaten as microgreens or added to salads.

Step 4.3: Weed Management
Radishes grow so fast that weeds are usually not a major problem if the seedbed was clean . However, if weeds appear, remove them promptly by hand pulling or shallow cultivation. Be careful not to disturb the radish roots.

Step 4.4: Mulching (Optional)
A light mulch of straw or dried leaves can be applied after thinning to conserve moisture and suppress weeds . However, because radishes grow so fast, mulch is not always necessary.

Step 4.5: Nutrition and Feeding
Radishes are light feeders and usually do not need additional fertilizer if the soil is reasonably fertile . If your soil is poor, you can apply a liquid organic fertilizer like compost tea or diluted fish emulsion when the seedlings are a few inches tall . Too much nitrogen will cause lush tops and small, poor-quality roots.

Step 4.6: Pest Management

Radishes are relatively pest-free, but some insects can be a problem.

4.6.1. Flea Beetles
These tiny beetles riddle the leaves with small holes. They are most common in spring .

Row Covers: Floating row covers placed over young plants physically exclude the beetles.

Mulch: Research suggests that straw mulch can reduce flea beetle damage .

Natural Sprays: If necessary, use insecticidal soap or neem oil, sprayed in the evening.

4.6.2. Root Maggots
These are the larvae of a small fly that tunnels into the roots. They are more common in cool, moist conditions.

Row Covers: Exclude the adult flies with row covers at planting time.

Crop Rotation: Do not plant radishes in the same spot where other root crops grew the previous year.

Companion Planting: Some growers plant radishes near plants that repel the flies.

4.6.3. Aphids
Small insects that cluster on new growth. Spray with a strong stream of water or use insecticidal soap.

Step 4.7: Disease Management

Diseases are rare in fast-growing radishes, but can occur in wet conditions.

4.7.1. Prevention Practices

Good Drainage: Ensure the soil drains well.

Avoid Overcrowding: Proper spacing allows air to circulate.

Crop Rotation: Practice rotation.

4.7.2. Common Diseases

Damping Off: A fungal disease that kills seedlings. Prevent by not over-watering and using well-drained soil.

Downy Mildew: Yellow spots on leaves. Ensure good air circulation.

Clubroot: A soil-borne disease that causes swollen, distorted roots. Prevent by maintaining proper soil pH (liming acidic soils) and long rotations .
`,
          stage5: `Harvesting
Harvesting at the right time is critical for radishes. They are ready very quickly, and they do not wait.

Step 5.1: Know When to Harvest
Radishes are ready to harvest when the roots reach the expected size for the variety. This can be as soon as three weeks after planting for some small, fast types . For most spring varieties, it is about one month . For winter radishes, it may take two months or more .

The best way to know is to gently brush away the soil at the base of the leaves and look at the root. When it is the size you want, harvest it.

Step 5.2: Do Not Wait Too Long
Radishes left in the ground too long become pithy, spongy, hot, and may crack . They decline in quality rapidly. It is better to harvest a little early than a little late.

Step 5.3: Harvest by Pulling
To harvest, grasp the radish at the base of the greens and pull gently. If the soil is compacted, you can loosen it first with a hand fork.

Step 5.4: Harvest in Stages
Because radishes mature at slightly different rates, you can harvest selectively, taking the largest ones first and leaving the smaller ones to grow a little longer .

Step 5.5: Harvest in Cool Conditions
Harvest in the cool of the morning if possible, and keep harvested radishes out of direct sun to prevent wilting.

Step 5.6: Remove Tops Immediately
After harvest, remove the green tops by cutting or twisting them off. If left on, the tops continue to draw moisture from the root, causing it to wilt .
`,
          stage6: `Post-Harvest and Storage
Step 6.1: Clean Gently
Rinse radishes gently in cool water to remove soil. Do not scrub or damage the skin. Trim off any root hairs or blemishes.

Step 6.2: Sort and Grade
Sort radishes by size and quality. Remove any that are cracked, misshapen, or damaged. Uniform, crisp, brightly colored radishes will fetch the best price.

Step 6.3: Store with Humidity
Radishes store best in cool, humid conditions .

Short-Term Storage: In the refrigerator, place radishes in a plastic bag in the crisper drawer. They will keep for several weeks .

Root Cellar: For longer storage, especially for winter varieties, store in damp sand or sawdust in a cool, root cellar-like environment . Do not wash them before this type of storage.

Storage Life: Spring radishes do not store as long as winter varieties.

Step 6.4: Do Not Freeze
Radishes do not freeze well; they become soft and mushy when thawed.

Step 6.5: Using Radish as a Cover Crop
One unique use of radishes, especially daikon types, is as a cover crop or "tillage radish" . Planted in late summer, they grow large roots that break up compacted soil. When they winter-kill, the decomposing roots leave channels that improve soil structure and add organic matter . If you have extra seed or a poor market, consider this soil-building option.

Step 6.6: Saving Seed
Radishes are biennial and require overwintering to produce seed. To save seed, select healthy roots at harvest, store them properly over winter, and replant them in spring. They will flower and produce seed pods. This is an advanced technique best left to experienced growers.

By following these stages, you can grow crisp, flavorful radishes naturally, harvest them at the peak of perfection, and use even your failures to build better soil for future crops without using any chemicals.
`,
                  },
        water: 'Medium', 
        temp: '15-20°C', 
        duration: '60-70 days', 
        soil: 'Sandy soil', 
        fertilizer: 'NPK 60:60:60', 
        yield: '15-20 tons/ha' 
      }
    ],
    black: [
      { 
        id: 32, 
        name: 'Chickpea', 
        image: cropImages.chickpea, 
        titleDescription: 'Chickpea in black soils benefits from residual moisture, requiring careful drainage and proper seedbed preparation for successful organic pulse production.',
        description: {
          stage1: `Land Preparation
Chickpeas are not demanding crops, but they are very sensitive to certain soil conditions. Getting the land right is the first step to success.

Step 1.1: Choose the Right Field
Chickpeas grow best in soils that are well-drained and not too heavy. They absolutely cannot stand waterlogging. If water stands in the field, the roots will rot and the plants will die. Soils that are light to medium in texture, with good structure, are ideal. Avoid heavy clay soils that hold water for long periods. The soil should be neutral to slightly alkaline, not acidic. If the soil is too acidic, the plants will not grow well and the nitrogen-fixing bacteria on their roots will not work properly .

Step 1.2: Deep Ploughing for Deep Roots
Chickpeas send a deep taproot into the soil. Start with a deep ploughing using a soil-turning plough. This breaks any hard pans or compacted layers below the surface, allowing the taproot to penetrate deeply and access moisture stored in the subsoil .

Step 1.3: Create a Fine, Firm Seedbed
After deep ploughing, do two or three harrowings or ploughings with a country plough. After each ploughing, do planking. Planking means dragging a heavy wooden plank over the field to break clods and level the surface. The goal is a seedbed that is fine and firm, not too fluffy. A firm seedbed ensures that all seeds are planted at a uniform depth and have good contact with the soil. This is especially important for chickpeas because they are planted after the rains, on stored soil moisture.

Step 1.4: Time Your Preparation Correctly
In many regions, chickpeas are grown in the rabi (winter) season on moisture left over from the monsoon. Land preparation must be timed carefully. The first seedbed preparation can be done early, but the final preparation should happen when the soil has the right moisture—not too wet, not too dry. If the soil is too wet, it will become compacted. If too dry, it will be hard to work. Wait for the soil to dry enough after the monsoon rains so that it is workable but still has good moisture below .

Step 1.5: Add Organic Manure
During the final ploughing, spread well-decomposed farmyard manure or compost over the field and mix it into the soil . Research has shown that applying farmyard manure significantly improves the growth and yield of chickpeas compared to no manure . The manure should be well-rotted, not fresh.

Step 1.6: Level the Field
A well-leveled field ensures that any irrigation or rainfall spreads evenly and does not collect in low spots. Use a leveller to make the field as flat as possible. Chickpeas are especially sensitive to water collection around their stems.
`,
          stage2: `Seed Selection and Treatment
Chickpea seeds are relatively large, with a wrinkled surface and a pointed tip. The seed is the most important input, and it must be treated carefully to protect it from soil-borne diseases.

Step 2.1: Select the Right Variety
Choose a variety that is suited to your region and your growing season. Some varieties mature early, some take longer. In areas with a short growing season, choose an early-maturing variety. Also consider whether you want to harvest green chickpeas for fresh eating or wait for the dried grain.

Step 2.2: Obtain Good Quality Seed
Use certified seed from a reliable source, or save your own seed from a healthy, disease-free crop. The seeds should be plump, uniform in size, and free from cracks, discoloration, or damage. Avoid seeds that are shriveled or have small holes.

Step 2.3: Soak Seeds Before Sowing
A simple but effective treatment is to soak the seeds in plain water for some time before sowing. This enhances the germination percentage by hydrating the seed and activating the embryo .

Step 2.4: Treat with Sour Buttermilk
A traditional method to control wilt and root rot diseases is to treat the seeds with sour buttermilk. Mix the seeds with well-fermented, sour butter milk and then dry them in the shade before sowing. The acidic nature of the buttermilk creates an environment that suppresses disease-causing fungi in the soil around the seed .

Step 2.5: Treat with Turmeric and Sweet Flag
Another traditional treatment is to smear the seeds with a mixture of turmeric powder and sweet flag powder. Mix these powders with a little water to make a paste, coat the seeds, and sow after a short time. This enhances the disease resistance of the crop .

Step 2.6: Treat with Trichoderma
For extra protection against soil-borne diseases, treat the seeds with Trichoderma powder, a friendly fungus that lives on the seed coat and fights off harmful fungi. Moisten the seeds slightly, then add the powder and mix until all seeds are coated.

Step 2.7: Inoculate with Rhizobium
Chickpeas need a specific type of Rhizobium bacteria to form nodules on their roots and fix nitrogen from the air. If chickpeas have not been grown in your field recently, the right bacteria may not be present in sufficient numbers. Treat the seeds with the specific Rhizobium culture for chickpeas just before planting. This ensures that millions of the right bacteria are right there on the seed, ready to infect the roots and form nitrogen-fixing nodules .
`,
          stage3: `Planting
Planting at the right time and depth is critical for chickpeas because they depend on stored soil moisture.

Step 3.1: Plant at the Right Time
Chickpeas are typically planted in the rabi season, after the monsoon rains have ended and the soil has sufficient moisture. In many regions, this is from October to November. Planting too early can expose the crop to excess moisture and disease. Planting too late means the soil may be too dry, and the crop may not have enough time to mature before temperatures rise in spring.

Step 3.2: Plant at the Right Depth
Plant chickpea seeds at a medium depth, not too shallow and not too deep. If planted too shallow, the seed may dry out or be eaten by birds. If planted too deep, the seedling may not have enough energy to reach the surface. A depth of about two inches is generally good .

Step 3.3: Maintain Proper Spacing
The space between rows and between plants affects how well the crop grows and how much it yields.

Between Rows: Rows should be spaced so that there is enough room for the plants to grow without competing too much for moisture, but close enough that the canopy covers the ground and suppresses weeds. A spacing of about 12 to 18 inches between rows is common .

Between Plants: Within the row, plants should be spaced a few inches apart . If they are too crowded, they will compete and yields will suffer. If too spaced out, weeds will take over.
Research has shown that closer spacing can give higher yields, but the best spacing depends on your variety and soil conditions .

Step 3.4: Line Sowing is Best
Sowing in straight lines using a seed drill or by dropping seeds in furrows opened by a country plough is better than broadcasting. Line sowing ensures uniform depth and spacing, makes weeding easier, and gives each plant an equal chance to grow.

Step 3.5: Cover the Seeds
After dropping the seeds, cover them with soil. This can be done by passing a light plank over the field or by using a small country plough to push soil back into the furrows. The covering should be uniform so that all seeds emerge at the same time.

Step 3.6: Do Not Irrigate Immediately
Chickpeas are grown on residual moisture. If you have planted at the right time into soil with good moisture, you should not need to irrigate immediately. In fact, too much water at this stage can cause the seeds to rot.
`,
          stage4: `Field Management During Growth
Chickpeas are a low-maintenance crop once established, but they need attention at certain stages.

Step 4.1: Watch for Emergence
The seeds will sprout and emerge within one to two weeks, depending on soil temperature and moisture . Walk through the field after emergence and look for any gaps. If there are large gaps, you may need to replant those spots, but this is difficult after the crop has started.

Step 4.2: Weed Management
Weeds compete with young chickpeas for moisture and nutrients. However, chickpeas are not very competitive against weeds, so you must keep the field clean in the early stages.

Mechanical Weeding: Use a hoe or cultivator between the rows to cut weeds. This is best done when the chickpeas are small, before they start flowering .

Timing: The first weeding should be done about three to four weeks after sowing. A second weeding may be needed later, depending on weed growth.

Care: Be careful not to damage the chickpea plants or their shallow roots when weeding.

Step 4.3: Understanding Nitrogen Fixation
About a month after planting, gently dig up a few chickpea plants and look at the roots. You should see small round nodules attached to the roots. Slice a few open with your fingernail. If they are pink or red inside, your inoculation worked perfectly, and the bacteria are actively fixing nitrogen from the air for the plant. This is a sign of a healthy crop.

Step 4.4: Water Management
Chickpeas are drought-tolerant and generally do not need irrigation if grown on good residual moisture. In fact, they prefer dry conditions once established. However, if there is a prolonged dry spell during flowering and pod filling, and if you have irrigation available, a single light irrigation can help. Do not over-water, and do not irrigate late in the season, as this can encourage diseases and delay maturity.

Step 4.5: Pest Management

Chickpeas do not suffer from many pests, but there are a few to watch for.

4.5.1. Pod Borer
The main pest of chickpeas is the pod borer, a caterpillar that feeds on the developing pods and grains. Walk through the field and look for holes in pods or caterpillars on the plants.

Monitoring: Check your field regularly, especially during flowering and pod formation.

Neem Spray: If you see pod borer damage, spray a neem-based solution on the plants. Neem repels and disrupts the feeding of many caterpillars.

Encourage Natural Enemies: Maintain flowering plants on field borders to attract beneficial insects like parasitic wasps that attack pod borers.

4.5.2. Cutworms
Cutworms are caterpillars that cut young seedlings at the base. They are more common in fields with heavy crop residue.

If you see cutworm damage, remove any mulch or residue from around the base of affected plants to expose the caterpillars to birds and sun.

Step 4.6: Disease Management

Diseases are a bigger challenge in chickpeas than pests, especially wilt and root rots.

4.6.1. Wilt and Root Rot
These are fungal diseases that cause plants to wilt and die. They are most common in soils that are too wet or in fields where chickpeas have been grown too often.

Prevention is Key: The best control is prevention through crop rotation. Do not grow chickpeas in the same field more than once every three to four years .

Seed Treatment: The seed treatments described earlier (buttermilk, turmeric, Trichoderma) are your main defense against these diseases.

Remove Infected Plants: If you see a plant wilting and dying, pull it out and destroy it. This removes the source of infection from the field.

4.6.2. Mildew and Botrytis
In prolonged wet weather, chickpeas can suffer from powdery mildew or grey mold (Botrytis) . These fungal diseases appear as white powdery spots or grey fuzzy growth on leaves and pods.

Good Air Flow: Proper spacing and weed control help air circulate through the crop, reducing humidity and the risk of these diseases.

Remove Affected Parts: If you see disease starting, remove affected leaves or plants to slow the spread.

Sulfur Spray: In severe cases, a sulfur-based spray approved for organic farming can be used.

4.6.3. Bacterial Blights
Bacterial diseases can also affect chickpeas, causing spots on leaves and pods.

Crop Rotation: Rotating crops and composting old plant debris helps manage bacterial diseases .

Do Not Work in Wet Fields: Avoid walking through or working in the field when the plants are wet, as this can spread bacterial diseases.
`,
          stage5: `Harvesting
Chickpeas can be harvested at two different stages: as green, fresh peas or as mature, dried grain.

Step 5.1: Harvesting Green Chickpeas
If you want to harvest green chickpeas for fresh eating, pick them when you can feel the peas through the pods. This is usually about two months after sowing . The peas will be green and tender. Harvest regularly to encourage the plant to produce more pods. Wear gloves when harvesting in sunny weather, as the leaves can give off a substance that irritates the skin .

Step 5.2: Harvesting for Dried Grain
If you are growing chickpeas for dried grain, wait until the plants are fully mature. The leaves will turn yellow and dry, and the pods will turn brown or tan and become brittle. The seeds inside will rattle when you shake the pod . The seeds should be hard and not dent when pressed with a fingernail.

Step 5.3: Cut the Plants
When the crop is fully mature, cut the plants close to the ground using a sickle or a sharp knife. Let them dry in the field in small piles or windrows for a few days. This allows the remaining moisture in the plants to finish drying the pods.

Step 5.4: Protect from Rodents and Birds
As the grain dries, it becomes attractive to rodents and birds. If you are drying the plants in the field, watch for damage. In some areas, farmers stack the plants in a dry, protected place for final drying.

Step 5.5: Threshing
Once the plants and pods are completely dry, thresh them to separate the grain. This can be done by beating the plants with sticks on a clean floor, by having bullocks walk on them, or by using a threshing machine. If using a machine, adjust it gently so it does not crack the seeds.

Step 5.6: Winnowing
After threshing, the grain is mixed with chaff, broken pods, and dust. On a breezy day, winnow the mixture by dropping it from a height using a winnowing fan or basket. The wind blows away the light chaff, and the clean, heavy grain falls straight down.

Step 5.7: Cleaning
After winnowing, remove any remaining stones, broken seeds, or other debris by hand or with a simple sieve.
`,
          stage6: `Post-Harvest and Storage
Step 6.1: Dry the Grain Thoroughly
Even after threshing and winnowing, the grain may still have some moisture. Spread the clean grain in a thin layer on clean mats, tarpaulins, or a clean cemented floor. Turn it frequently so it dries evenly. Dry it in the sun for several days until it is completely hard and dry. Bite a seed; it should crack, not squash.

Step 6.2: Test for Moisture
Chickpeas stored with any moisture will develop mold and weevils. Make sure the grain is bone-dry before storage.

Step 6.3: Prepare Storage Containers
Clean your storage containers or gunny bags thoroughly. If reusing old bags, make sure they are completely clean and dry. Do not leave any old grain inside, as it may contain hidden insects.

Step 6.4: Mix with Natural Protectants
If you store grain in bags or bins, mix in some dried neem leaves or other aromatic leaves that repel insects. Some farmers also mix ash with the grain to deter weevils. Make sure the ash is cool and completely dry before mixing.

Step 6.5: Store Off the Ground
If using gunny bags, store them on wooden pallets or planks raised off the ground. Do not let the bags touch the wall, as walls can get damp. Keep the storage area clean, dry, and well-ventilated.

Step 6.6: Save Seed for Next Season
If you want to save your own seed for the next season, select the best, healthiest, and most uniform grains from your harvest. Store them separately in a clean, dry container. Chickpea seeds can remain viable for about three years if stored properly .

Step 6.7: Check Storage Periodically
Check your stored grain every few weeks. Put your hand deep into the grain and feel for any heat or moisture. Look for any signs of insects or mold. If you find any problems, re-dry the grain in the sun immediately.

By following these stages, you can grow healthy chickpeas naturally, work with their unique deep-rooted and drought-tolerant nature, and harvest good quality grain without using any chemicals.
`,
        },
        water: 'Low', 
        temp: '20-25°C', 
        duration: '90-110 days', 
        soil: 'Black soil', 
        fertilizer: 'NPK 20:60:40', 
        yield: '1.2-1.8 tons/ha' 
      },
      { 
        id: 33, 
        name: 'Wheat', 
        image: cropImages.wheat, 
        titleDescription: 'Wheat in black soils achieves high yields through residual moisture utilization, requiring proper land preparation and timely sowing for organic production.',
        description: {
          stage1: `Land Preparation and Planning
Wheat is not a crop you plant on a whim. Success begins with planning a year or more in advance, choosing the right field, and building the soil before the seed ever goes in the ground.

Step 1.1: Choose the Right Field
Wheat grows best in well-drained loam or clay-loam soils that hold moisture but do not waterlog. The soil should be deep and fertile, with a neutral pH . Avoid fields with a history of persistent perennial weeds like wild garlic or Italian ryegrass, as there are no good organic methods to control these once wheat is planted . Also avoid fields known to have soil-borne viruses, as these cannot be eliminated once present .

Step 1.2: Practice Long Rotations
Never plant wheat in the same field two years in a row. Wheat stubble left from the previous year harbors diseases like Fusarium head blight (scab), Septoria, and tan spot, as well as Hessian fly pupae that will attack a new crop . The safest approach is to plant wheat only once every three or four years in a given field, rotating with legumes, oilseeds, or other crops that break disease cycles .

Step 1.3: Choose a Field Away from Last Year's Wheat
If possible, select a field that is at least a quarter mile away from any field that grew wheat the previous year . This distance helps prevent Hessian flies and other pests from migrating into your new crop .

Step 1.4: Build Soil Fertility with Previous Crops
Wheat's fertility needs are best met by what happened in the field before planting. A legume crop plowed under or a well-managed pasture adds nitrogen and organic matter to the soil . Good soil structure, built by previous crops and organic amendments, is essential for wheat's fibrous root system.

Step 1.5: Prepare a Firm, Fine Seedbed
Wheat needs a seedbed that is firm enough to support the drill and fine enough to ensure good seed-to-soil contact. Plow or till to incorporate previous crop residue, then harrow and level to create a smooth surface. The goal is a seedbed that is not too fluffy, so seeds are planted at a uniform depth.

Step 1.6: Add Organic Amendments Based on Need
If soil tests show deficiencies, add well-decomposed compost or manure before planting. However, avoid excessive nitrogen, which can cause lodging (falling over) and disease problems . Wheat is a moderately heavy feeder, but it prefers steady, balanced nutrition over a feast .

Step 1.7: Consider the Previous Crop's Residue
If you are planting after a crop that left a lot of residue, such as maize, that residue must be well incorporated and partially decomposed before wheat planting . Fresh, heavy residue can interfere with planting and harbor pests.
`,
          stage2: `Variety Selection and Seed Treatment
Choosing the right variety is perhaps the most important decision in organic wheat farming. There is no single best variety, so planting more than one variety spreads your risk .

Step 2.1: Choose Disease-Resistant Varieties
The two biggest disease threats to wheat are Fusarium head blight (scab) and Hessian fly . Only choose varieties that are rated as moderately resistant to scab. Avoid varieties rated poorly for Hessian fly resistance, especially if you are planting on time or early .

Step 2.2: Match Maturity to Your Climate
To avoid spring freeze injury, choose medium- or late-heading varieties rather than early-heading ones . The variety should be adapted to your region's day length and temperature patterns.

Step 2.3: Consider Your End Market
If you are growing wheat for the baking industry or for chapati flour, check with the end user about preferred varieties . Different wheats have different protein contents and gluten strengths, which affect their end use.

Step 2.4: Plant Multiple Varieties
Because no single variety performs best every year, plant at least two different varieties each season . This reduces your risk from pests, diseases, and weather.

Step 2.5: Use High-Quality, Untreated Seed
Start with clean, untreated seed from a reliable source. Seed should have high germination rates and be free from weed seeds, especially noxious weeds like wild garlic or ryegrass .

Step 2.6: Consider Seed Treatments
While many organic farmers plant untreated seed, you can treat seeds with beneficial microbes like Trichoderma to protect against soil-borne diseases. Some farmers also use compost tea or other biological seed treatments.
`,
          stage3: `Planting
Timing is everything in wheat production. Planting too early or too late invites disaster.

Step 3.1: Plant at the Optimum Time
Not too early, and not too late! Planting too early puts the crop at severe risk for powdery mildew, Hessian fly, aphids, and barley yellow dwarf virus . Planting too late reduces yields, increases winter annual weed problems, and results in thin stands vulnerable to insect feeding . The optimum planting window for your region is a narrow one, based on your local climate and the first freeze date.

Step 3.2: Calibrate Your Drill
A good, uniform stand of wheat is the best defense against weeds and insects . Take the time to calibrate your seed drill accurately. Check that all rows are planting at the same depth and that seed spacing is even.

Step 3.3: Plant at the Correct Depth
Plant wheat seeds at a consistent, medium depth, about one to two inches deep . In heavier soils or moist conditions, plant shallower. In sandy soils or dry conditions, plant slightly deeper. All seeds should emerge at the same time for a uniform stand.

Step 3.4: Use Narrow Row Spacing
Wheat planted in narrow rows, about six to eight inches apart, will shade the soil faster and suppress weeds . Some organic farmers use rows as narrow as four inches to help the crop outcompete winter annual weeds .

Step 3.5: Avoid Broadcast Seeding if Possible
Broadcast seeding often results in uneven seed depth and emergence, leading to lower yields . If you must broadcast, increase your seeding rate significantly to compensate for poor establishment, and use an implement that incorporates seed at a uniform depth .

Step 3.6: Plant at the Right Density
A thick, healthy stand is essential. Target a seeding rate that will produce a dense population of plants, enough to tiller well and shade out weeds. Increase the seeding rate if planting is delayed or if seed germination is below optimum .
`,
          stage4: `Field Management During Growth
Once wheat is planted, there is little you can do beyond monitoring and waiting. Most of the work happens before planting.

Step 4.1: Understand Tillering
Wheat plants produce multiple shoots from the base, called tillers. Each tiller can produce a seed head. A well-managed wheat crop with good spacing and fertility will produce many tillers, each contributing to the final yield . This is why early management is so important—every tiller you gain now is grain later.

Step 4.2: Weed Management Through Competition
Essentially all weed control in organic wheat must be achieved before planting . Once wheat is up, its own competitiveness is your main tool. A thick, vigorous stand planted at the right time in narrow rows will shade the soil and smother most weeds . Wheat is a strong competitor when given the right start.

Step 4.3: Pre-Emergence and Early Cultivation (Optional)
In some systems, a rotary hoe or tine weeder can be used before the crop emerges and again at the one-to-three leaf stage to kill small weed seedlings . However, this is not common in wheat because the crop is drilled in narrow rows.

Step 4.4: Water Management
Wheat is often grown as a rainfed crop and does not need irrigation in many regions. However, if you have irrigation, the most critical time for water is during stem elongation and grain filling. Drought during these stages severely reduces yield.

Step 4.5: Spring Nitrogen Management
If the crop appears nitrogen-deficient in early spring, you can apply a top-dressing of compost, manure, or an approved organic nitrogen source . The application window for spring nitrogen is very narrow, and only the immediately available fraction of organic fertilizers will benefit the crop in time . Some organic farms have enough nitrogen carryover from previous crops and may not need any spring application . A tissue test can help determine if additional nitrogen is needed .

Step 4.6: Pest Monitoring

4.6.1. Aphids
Aphids are small insects that suck plant sap and can transmit barley yellow dwarf virus . They are usually kept in check by natural enemies like lady beetles and parasitic wasps, which are abundant in wheat fields . Cold weather also kills them. Planting after the first freeze is the best way to avoid aphid problems .

4.6.2. Cereal Leaf Beetle
Both adult beetles and larvae feed on leaves. Larvae feeding in April and May can reduce yields. The best defense is a thick, densely tillered stand that can compensate for leaf loss . Practices that promote thick stands—planting on time, using quality seed, adequate fertility—reduce the risk of significant damage .

4.6.3. Armyworm
Armyworm infestations are sporadic but can be devastating when they occur, causing defoliation and even cutting off heads . No cultural controls are available. If an infestation occurs, organic farmers can either accept the damage or use an approved organic insecticide like spinosad or pyrethrin in emergency situations .

Step 4.7: Disease Monitoring

4.7.1. Scab (Fusarium Head Blight)
This disease infects flowering heads, causing bleaching and shriveled grain. It also produces toxins that make grain unsafe for consumption . The only defense is planting resistant varieties. Once the disease appears, there is no treatment.

4.7.2. Powdery Mildew
This fungal disease appears as white powder on leaves. It is worse in dense stands planted too early . Proper planting date and variety selection are the only controls.

4.7.3. Soilborne Mosaic Virus
This virus is transmitted by a soil-dwelling organism and can severely reduce yields . There is no cure. Fields with a history of this virus must be planted with resistant varieties or taken out of wheat production .

`,
          stage5: `Harvesting
Harvest timing is critical for preserving grain quality and preventing losses.

Step 5.1: Know When the Grain is Mature
Wheat is ready to harvest when the grain is hard and cannot be dented with your fingernail. The straw will have turned completely yellow and dry, and the heads will nod downward. Grain moisture should be low.

Step 5.2: Do Not Let Mature Grain Stand
Once wheat is mature, harvest promptly. Mature grain left standing in the field risks losses from birds, weather, and lodging . It also loses quality.

Step 5.3: Combine at the Right Settings
Adjust your combine to minimize grain cracking and loss. Harvest when the grain is dry enough to store but not so dry that it shatters easily.

Step 5.4: Create Seasonal Employment
Some organic farmers, like Sucha Singh Pabla in Punjab, employ manual labor for harvesting and threshing, creating valuable seasonal employment in their communities . This is a choice that can benefit both the farmer and local workers.

Step 5.5: Handle Grain Gently
Wheat grain is living and can be damaged by rough handling. Use care when moving grain to prevent cracking.
`,
          stage6: `Post-Harvest and Storage
Step 6.1: Clean the Grain
After harvest, clean the grain to remove chaff, weed seeds, and broken kernels. This improves storage life and market quality.

Step 6.2: Dry the Grain Thoroughly
Wheat must be dried to a safe moisture level for storage. Spread it in thin layers in the sun or use a low-temperature dryer if needed. Grain that is too moist will mold and spoil.

Step 6.3: Store in Clean, Dry Conditions
Store wheat in clean, dry bins or gunny bags. Protect it from rodents, birds, and insects. Keep storage areas clean and well-ventilated. Store bags off the ground on pallets.

Step 6.4: Check Stored Grain Regularly
Monitor stored grain for signs of heating, moisture, or insect infestation. If problems appear, you may need to re-dry or clean the grain.

Step 6.5: Add Value Through Processing
Some organic farmers increase their profits by processing their wheat into flour or other value-added products . The premium price for organic wheat, combined with lower input costs from on-farm compost and natural methods, can make organic wheat profitable even with lower yields .

Step 6.6: Save Seed for Next Season
If you grew a variety you want to keep, select the best, cleanest grain from your harvest to save as seed for next year. Store it separately with extra care.

Step 6.7: Incorporate Straw Back into Soil
After harvest, the straw remaining in the field is a valuable resource. Chop and spread it, then incorporate it into the soil. This returns organic matter and nutrients, building soil health for future crops . Avoid burning straw, which pollutes the air and destroys organic matter.

By following these stages, you can grow healthy, high-quality wheat naturally, work with its unique tillering ability and competitive nature, and harvest a profitable crop while building your soil for the future without using any chemicals.
`,       },
        water: 'Medium', 
        temp: '10-15°C', 
        duration: '120-150 days', 
        soil: 'Black soil', 
        fertilizer: 'NPK 120:60:40', 
        yield: '2.8-3.5 tons/ha' 
      },
      { 
        id: 34, 
        name: 'Mustard', 
        image: cropImages.mustard, 
        titleDescription: 'Mustard in black soils benefits from moisture reserves, requiring proper drainage and timely sowing for optimal organic oilseed production in heavy soils.',
        description: {
          stage1: `Land Preparation and Planning
Mustard is a rabi (winter) season crop that grows on the moisture left behind by the monsoon rains. Getting the land ready at the right time sets the stage for success.

Step 1.1: Choose the Right Field
Mustard is a drought-hardy crop that can grow under diverse conditions and in different types of soils . It grows best in well-drained loamy soils that are neutral to slightly acidic in pH . The most important requirement is good drainage. Mustard cannot tolerate waterlogging or standing water, which causes root rots. Avoid heavy clay soils that hold water for long periods.

Step 1.2: Practice Crop Rotation
Mustard belongs to the Brassica family and should not be grown in the same field year after year. A rotation of several years between Brassica crops is essential to prevent the buildup of soil-borne diseases . Good rotations include following mustard with grains, legumes, or other non-Brassica crops.

Step 1.3: Prepare the Soil After Monsoon
Land preparation for mustard begins after the monsoon rains end, when the soil has the right moisture. Start with a deep ploughing using a soil-turning plough. This breaks any hard pans and allows the deep taproot to penetrate.

Step 1.4: Create a Fine, Firm Seedbed
After deep ploughing, do two or three harrowings to bring the soil to a fine tilth. Planking after each ploughing helps break clods and level the field. The goal is a seedbed that is fine and firm, ensuring good seed-to-soil contact and uniform germination .

Step 1.5: Add Organic Manure
During the final ploughing, spread well-decomposed farmyard manure or compost over the field and mix it into the soil. Mustard responds well to organic matter, which helps the soil hold moisture during the dry winter months. The manure should be well-rotted, not fresh.

Step 1.6: Conserve Soil Moisture
Mustard is grown on residual moisture from the monsoon. After final ploughing, level the field well to ensure that the limited moisture is spread evenly. If your field has a slope, plough across the slope to catch and hold any winter rains.
`,
          stage2: `Seed Selection and Treatment
Choosing the right variety and treating the seed properly is the foundation of a good mustard crop.

Step 2.1: Choose the Right Variety
India is the largest mustard-growing country in the world, and there are many improved varieties available . Choose a variety suited to your region and your growing season. Some varieties mature early, some take longer. Early-maturing varieties can escape late-season drought or pest pressure. High-yielding varieties with good oil content are available through agricultural universities and extension agencies.

Step 2.2: Consider Dual-Purpose Varieties
If you want to harvest mustard greens as well as seeds, choose a variety known for both good leaf production and good seed yield. Some varieties are specifically bred for their leafy greens, while others are optimized for oilseed production.

Step 2.3: Obtain Quality Seed
Use certified seed from a reliable source, or save your own seed from a healthy, disease-free crop. The seeds should be plump, uniform in color, and free from damage or discoloration. Mustard seeds have a limited shelf life of about three years, after which germination rates decline .

Step 2.4: Treat Seeds with Trichoderma
To protect young seedlings from soil-borne diseases like damping off and root rots, treat the seeds with Trichoderma powder, a friendly fungus. Moisten the seeds slightly, then add the powder and mix until all seeds are coated. Dry in the shade and plant as soon as possible.

Step 2.5: Treat with Bio-Fertilizers
Mustard benefits from beneficial bacteria like Azotobacter and phosphorus-solubilizing bacteria that help the roots access nutrients. Treat the seeds with these bio-fertilizers just before planting. This can be done along with the Trichoderma treatment.

Step 2.6: Test Seed Germination
A simple way to check if your seed is good is to take a handful of seeds and place them on a wet cloth. Roll the cloth and keep it moist for a few days. After that, open it and see how many seeds have started sprouting. If most have sprouted, your seed is good.
`,
          stage3: `Planting
Timing and spacing are critical for mustard. Plant too early or too late, and you invite pests and diseases.

Step 3.1: Plant at the Right Time
Mustard is a rabi season crop. In most regions, the best time to sow is from mid-October to mid-November . Sowing at the right time ensures that the crop gets enough cool weather for vegetative growth and avoids pest pressure. In some areas, sowing continues until mid-September for winter varieties .

Step 3.2: Sow at the Correct Depth
Plant mustard seeds at a shallow depth, about one inch deep . In heavier soils or moist conditions, plant shallower. In sandy soils or if the soil is drying out, plant slightly deeper. Uniform depth ensures that all seeds emerge at the same time.

Step 3.3: Maintain Proper Spacing
Proper spacing is essential for good growth and yield .

Between Rows: Space rows about 12 to 18 inches apart. This allows enough room for air circulation, which reduces disease.

Between Plants: Within the row, thin plants to about 4 to 6 inches apart.

For dual-purpose varieties where you will also harvest greens, you may plant slightly closer and harvest some plants as greens, leaving others to mature for seed.

Step 3.4: Line Sowing is Best
Sowing in straight lines using a seed drill or by dropping seeds in furrows opened by a country plough is much better than broadcasting. Line sowing ensures uniform depth and spacing, makes weeding easier, and gives each plant an equal chance to grow.

Step 3.5: Plant at the Right Density
A thick, healthy stand is essential for good yields. Plant at a seed rate that will produce a dense population of plants, enough to tiller well and shade out weeds. Increase the seeding rate if planting is delayed or if seed germination is below optimum.

Step 3.6: Cover the Seeds
After dropping the seeds, cover them with soil. This can be done by passing a light plank over the field or by using a small country plough to push soil back into the furrows. Lightly firm the soil to ensure good seed-to-soil contact.
`,
          stage4: `Field Management During Growth
Mustard grows through distinct stages: seedling, vegetative growth, flowering, and pod filling. Each stage needs different attention.

Step 4.1: Watch for Emergence
Mustard seeds germinate quickly, usually within a week, depending on soil temperature and moisture. Walk through the field after emergence and look for any gaps. If there are large gaps, you may need to replant those spots.

Step 4.2: Thinning
When the seedlings are a few inches tall, about two to three weeks after emergence, thin them to the desired spacing . Remove the weaker seedlings, leaving the strongest ones with enough space. Thinning ensures that each remaining plant has room to grow into a large, productive bush.

Step 4.3: First Weeding
Weeds compete with young mustard for water and nutrients. Do the first weeding about three to four weeks after sowing, before the weeds get big . Use a hoe or cultivator between the rows. Be careful not to damage the young plants.

Step 4.4: Second Weeding
A second weeding is usually done about two weeks after the first, if needed. By this time, the mustard plants should be growing rapidly and will soon shade the ground, suppressing further weed growth.

Step 4.5: Water Management
Mustard is moderately drought-tolerant, but it responds well to irrigation at critical stages .

Young Plants: Keep soil moist to help them establish.

Vegetative Growth: Mustard can tolerate dry spells.

Critical Stages: The most water-sensitive stages are flowering and pod development. If you have irrigation, this is the time to use it .

Avoid Over-Watering: Do not overwater, as mustard cannot tolerate waterlogging. Too much water can harm roots and trigger fungal diseases .

Step 4.6: Nutrition and Feeding
A well-fed crop is a high-yielding crop .

Basal Dressing: The compost or manure you added at planting provides a good base.

Top Dressing: If your soil is poor, you can apply a side dressing of compost or liquid organic fertilizer like compost tea or diluted cow urine during the vegetative growth stage .

Foliar Sprays: Foliar sprays enriched with micronutrients can encourage better flowering and pod formation . Healthy plants produce more seeds and richer oil content.

Step 4.7: Pest Management

*4.7.1. Aphids - The Most Serious Pest*
Aphids are small insects that suck sap from plants, causing leaves to curl and plants to weaken. They are the main pest of mustard .

Monitoring: Check plants regularly, especially during flowering. Look for clusters of aphids on tender shoots and under leaves.

Natural Predators: Encourage ladybugs and lacewings by maintaining flowering plants around the field. These natural enemies will help control aphids.

Neem Spray: If aphid populations build up, spray a neem-based solution. Neem repels and disrupts the feeding of many insects.

Botanical Extracts: Research has shown that extracts from plants like nutmeg can also be effective against aphids.

4.7.2. Sawfly
Sawfly larvae are caterpillar-like insects that feed on leaves, defoliating plants.

Monitoring: Check plants for larvae, especially on leaf undersides.

Hand Picking: If populations are small, you can hand-pick the larvae and destroy them.

Neem Spray: Neem-based sprays can help control sawfly.

4.7.3. Flea Beetles
These tiny beetles riddle the leaves with small holes. They are most common on young seedlings .

Row Covers: Floating row covers placed over young plants physically exclude the beetles.

Silver Mulch: Silver-colored plastic mulch can repel flea beetles .

Natural Sprays: If necessary, use pyrethrin-based sprays, which are approved in organic farming .

4.7.4. Integrated Pest Management
A combination of methods works best:

Monitor fields regularly.

Encourage natural predators.

Use botanical sprays only when pest pressure is high.

Maintain crop rotations to break pest cycles.

Step 4.8: Disease Management

4.8.1. White Rust
This fungal disease appears as white, blister-like pustules on leaves and stems. It can cause swelling and distortion of floral parts .

Prevention: Use disease-free seed and practice crop rotation.

Resistant Varieties: Choose varieties with resistance to white rust if available.

Remove Infected Plants: If you see infected plants, remove and destroy them to prevent spread.

4.8.2. Downy Mildew
This disease causes yellowish spots on upper leaf surfaces and a downy growth on undersides. It is favored by cool, moist conditions .

Prevention: Ensure good air circulation through proper spacing. Avoid overhead irrigation.

Crop Rotation: Long rotations help reduce disease buildup.

Remove Infected Plants: Remove and destroy severely infected plants.

4.8.3. Alternaria Blight
This fungal disease causes dark, target-like spots on leaves and pods .

Prevention: Use disease-free seed and practice crop rotation.

Seed Treatment: Treat seeds with Trichoderma to reduce seed-borne infection.

Neem Spray: Neem-based sprays can help suppress the disease.

4.8.4. Disease Prevention Practices
The best defense against diseases is prevention:

Crop Rotation: Follow a 5-7 year rotation between Brassica crops .

Good Air Flow: Proper spacing allows air to circulate, reducing humidity.

Clean Seed: Always use clean, disease-free seed.

Remove Crop Residue: After harvest, remove or incorporate crop residue to reduce disease carryover.
`,
          stage5: `Harvesting
Harvesting at the right time is critical for preserving oil quality and preventing seed loss.

Step 5.1: Know When the Crop is Mature
Mustard is ready for harvest when the leaves turn yellow and start to dry, and the pods turn from green to brown or tan . The seeds inside will be hard and rattle when you shake the pod.

Step 5.2: Harvest at the Perfect Time
Do not wait too long to harvest, or the pods will shatter and shed their seeds . Harvest when most pods are mature but before they start shattering.

Step 5.3: Cut the Plants
Use a sharp sickle or knife to cut the plants close to the ground. Let them dry in the field in small piles or windrows for a few days. This allows the remaining moisture in the plants to finish drying the pods.

Step 5.4: Handle with Care
Mustard pods shatter easily. Handle the cut plants gently to avoid losing seeds. If possible, harvest in the early morning when pods are less likely to shatter.

Step 5.5: Threshing
Once the plants and pods are completely dry, thresh them to separate the grain. This can be done by beating the plants with sticks on a clean floor, by having bullocks walk on them, or by using a threshing machine. If using a machine, adjust it gently to minimize seed damage.

Step 5.6: Winnowing
After threshing, the grain is mixed with chaff, broken pods, and dust. On a breezy day, winnow the mixture by dropping it from a height using a winnowing fan or basket. The wind blows away the light chaff, and the clean, heavy grain falls straight down.

Step 5.7: Drying the Grain
Spread the clean grain in a thin layer in the sun for several days to ensure it is perfectly dry. Bite a seed; it should be very hard and crack, not squash. Proper drying is essential for safe storage and preserving oil quality .
`,
          stage6: `Post-Harvest and Storage
Step 6.1: Storage Pests
The main pest of stored mustard is various stored grain insects. Clean storage and proper drying are the best defenses.

Step 6.2: Dry Grain Thoroughly
Ensure the grain is completely dry before storage. Mustard seeds stored with any moisture will develop mold and lose oil quality.

Step 6.3: Clean Storage Containers
Clean your storage containers or gunny bags thoroughly. If reusing old bags, make sure they are completely clean and dry. Do not leave any old grain inside, as it may contain hidden insects.

Step 6.4: Mix with Natural Protectants
If you store grain in bags or bins, you can mix in dried neem leaves or other aromatic leaves that repel insects. Make sure the leaves are completely dry before mixing.

Step 6.5: Store in a Cool, Dry Place
Store mustard grain in a cool, dry, well-ventilated place away from moisture and direct sunlight . Protect it from rodents and insects. Keep bags off the ground on wooden pallets.

Step 6.6: Preserve Oil Quality
Proper storage preserves oil quality and ensures your crop fetches the best price in the market .

Step 6.7: Save Seed for Next Season
If you want to save your own seed for the next season, select the best, healthiest, and most uniform grains from your harvest. Store them separately in a clean, dry container. Mustard seeds can remain viable for a limited time if stored properly, usually up to three years .

Step 6.8: Add Value Through Processing
Some organic farmers increase their profits by processing mustard seeds into oil, which can be sold at a premium. The oil content in mustard varieties ranges from 33 to 46 percent . Value addition through oil extraction can significantly increase profitability.

Step 6.9: Use Crop Residue
After threshing, the remaining stalks and chaff can be incorporated into the soil as organic matter. Mustard residue, with its bio-fumigant properties, can help suppress soil-borne pests and diseases for the next crop.

Step 6.10: Check Stored Grain Periodically
Check your stored grain every few weeks. Put your hand deep into the grain and feel for any heat or moisture. Look for any signs of insects or mold. If you find any problems, re-dry the grain in the sun immediately.

By following these stages, you can grow healthy, high-quality mustard naturally, work with its unique drought-hardy and soil-improving nature, and harvest a profitable crop of oil-rich seeds without using any chemicals.
`,
        },
        water: 'Low', 
        temp: '10-25°C', 
        duration: '90-120 days', 
        soil: 'Black soil', 
        fertilizer: 'NPK 60:40:40', 
        yield: '1-1.5 tons/ha' 
      },
      { 
        id: 35, 
        name: 'Linseed', 
        image: cropImages.linseed, 
        titleDescription: 'Linseed or flaxseed is a nutritious oilseed crop adapted to black soils, with organic methods producing omega-3 rich seeds for health and industry.',
        description: {
          stage1: `Land Preparation and Planning
Linseed is not a demanding crop, but it needs well-prepared soil to establish its delicate root system.

Step 1.1: Choose the Right Field
Linseed grows best in well-drained loamy or sandy soils . It can grow in deep cotton soils of central India and alluvial loam soils of north India, but the soil must be well-drained . The ideal soil pH ranges from neutral to slightly alkaline, between about 6.5 and 7.5 . Linseed absolutely cannot tolerate waterlogging or standing water. Avoid heavy clay soils that stay wet for long periods.

Step 1.2: Understand the Climate Needs
Linseed needs a cool climate . During germination, it prefers temperatures between 25 to 30 degrees Celsius. During seed formation, it needs cooler temperatures, around 15 to 20 degrees Celsius . If temperatures are too high at this stage, the plant will flower early and produce poor yields. As a rainfed crop, it grows well in areas receiving moderate rainfall . Rainfall during flowering and grain formation can cause poor grain setting, and rain at grain maturity can lead to disease .

Step 1.3: Practice Crop Rotation
Linseed should not be grown in the same field year after year. Rotating with other crops helps break disease cycles and maintain soil health. In some regions, linseed is sown as a relay crop in standing rice fields during September to October, a system called paira or utera cropping . This allows two crops to be grown in one season without extra land preparation.

Step 1.4: Prepare a Fine, Smooth Seedbed
Linseed needs a fine and smooth seedbed, free from clods . The seeds are small and need good contact with the soil to germinate. Start with a deep ploughing to bury crop residue, then do two or three harrowings to bring the soil to a fine tilth. Planking after each ploughing helps break clods and level the field.

Step 1.5: Ensure the Field is Free of Termites and Ants
Linseed fields must be free of termites and ants, which can damage the roots and stems . If you have termite problems in your area, incorporate neem cake or other natural repellents during land preparation.

Step 1.6: Add Organic Manure
During final ploughing, spread well-decomposed farmyard manure or vermicompost over the field and mix it into the soil. Research has shown that combining farmyard manure with vermicompost can significantly increase plant height, dry matter accumulation, and seed yield compared to using no manure . The manure should be well-rotted, not fresh.

Step 1.7: Consider Using Rice Fallows
In areas with rice-wheat cropping systems, linseed can be grown in the fallow period after rice harvest. This increases cropping intensity and makes use of residual moisture . If you have rice fallows, you can bring a portion of that area under linseed cultivation.
`,
          stage2: `Seed Selection and Treatment
Choosing the right variety and treating the seed properly sets the stage for a successful crop.

Step 2.1: Choose a Suitable Variety
There are many improved varieties of linseed suited to different regions. Some popular varieties include Neelam, K2, Himilini, Jawahar 17, Jawahar 18, Mukta, and Chambal . For some regions, varieties like LSL-93 and Priyam have been found to perform exceptionally well . Choose a variety that is well-adapted to your local conditions and your intended market.

Step 2.2: Obtain Quality Seed
Use certified seed from a reliable source, or save your own seed from a healthy, disease-free crop. The seeds should be plump, shiny, and free from damage or discoloration.

Step 2.3: Consider Seed Priming
Seed priming means soaking the seeds in water before planting to improve germination. This can help the seeds establish more quickly and uniformly, especially in dry conditions .

Step 2.4: Treat with Trichoderma
To protect young seedlings from soil-borne diseases like wilt and root rot, treat the seeds with Trichoderma powder, a friendly fungus. Moisten the seeds slightly, then add the powder and mix until all seeds are coated. Dry in the shade and plant as soon as possible.

Step 2.5: Treat with Bio-Fertilizers
Linseed benefits from beneficial bacteria and fungi that help the roots access nutrients. Treat the seeds with NPK consortium, which contains nitrogen-fixing and phosphorus-solubilizing organisms . This can be done along with the Trichoderma treatment.
`,
          stage3: `Planting
Timing and spacing are critical for giving linseed a strong start.

Step 3.1: Plant at the Right Time
The optimum time of sowing is very vital for linseed .

For Rainfed Crop: Sow from mid-September to mid-October .

For Irrigated Crop: Sow from mid-October to mid-November .

For Relay Cropping: Sow in standing rice crop during September to October .

Planting at the right time ensures the crop experiences the right temperatures during germination and seed formation and avoids disease pressure.

Step 3.2: Sow at the Correct Depth
Plant linseed seeds at a shallow depth, about 2 to 3 centimeters. In heavier soils or moist conditions, plant shallower. In sandy soils or if the soil is drying out, plant slightly deeper. Uniform depth ensures that all seeds emerge at the same time.

Step 3.3: Maintain Proper Spacing
Proper spacing is essential for good growth and air circulation.

Between Rows: Space rows about 20 to 30 centimeters apart . For fiber production, closer spacing may be used to encourage tall, straight stems.

Between Plants: Within the row, space plants about 7 to 10 centimeters apart .

Step 3.4: Use the Right Seed Rate
The amount of seed you use depends on your sowing method :

For Line Sowing: Use a lower seed rate.

For Broadcasting: Use a higher seed rate.

Step 3.5: Line Sowing is Best
Sowing in straight lines using a seed drill or by dropping seeds in furrows opened by a country plough is better than broadcasting. Line sowing ensures uniform depth and spacing, makes weeding easier, and gives each plant an equal chance to grow.

Step 3.6: Cover and Firm the Soil
After sowing, cover the seeds with soil and gently firm the soil to ensure good seed-to-soil contact. This helps draw moisture to the seed and promotes even germination.
`,
          stage4: `Field Management During Growth
Linseed grows through distinct stages: germination, vegetative growth, flowering, and seed formation. Each stage needs different attention.

Step 4.1: Watch for Emergence
The seeds will sprout and emerge within about 7 to 14 days, depending on soil temperature and moisture. Walk through the field after emergence and look for any gaps.

Step 4.2: Weed Management
Weeds compete with linseed for water and nutrients. The critical period for weed control is up to about 25 days after sowing . After that, the linseed plants should be established enough to compete.

First Weeding: Do the first hand weeding at about 21 days after sowing .

Second Weeding: Do a second weeding at about 35 to 40 days after sowing .

Suppression: Linseed itself covers the ground quickly and can help suppress weeds . In some systems, linseed is intercropped with other crops to improve weed suppression .

Step 4.3: Water Management
Linseed needs efficient irrigation at critical stages .

For Irrigated Crop: Give light irrigations at about 35 days after sowing and again at about 65 days after sowing .

Critical Stages: The most critical stages for water are flowering and grain filling .

Avoid Over-Watering: Do not over-water, and ensure the field drains well. Linseed cannot tolerate waterlogging.

Step 4.4: Nutrition and Feeding
Linseed has low nutrient demand compared to many other crops, which makes it attractive for organic farming .

Basal Dressing: The compost or manure you added at planting provides a good base.

Top Dressing: If your soil is poor, you can apply additional organic manure or liquid fertilizers during the growing season. Research has shown that applying nitrogen through organic sources like farmyard manure, vermicompost, and castor cake can provide good yields .

Avoid Excess: Do not over-fertilize, as this can cause lodging (falling over).

Step 4.5: Pest Management

4.5.1. Bud Fly
Bud fly is an insect pest that attacks the flower buds .

Monitoring: Check plants regularly during flowering.

Natural Controls: Encourage beneficial insects by maintaining flowering plants around the field.

4.5.2. General Insect Pests
Mixed cropping systems, where linseed is grown with other crops, can help reduce pest pressure by diversifying the plant cover and supporting parasitoids of insect pests .

Step 4.6: Disease Management

Linseed can be affected by several fungal diseases .

4.6.1. Wilt
This soil-borne fungal disease causes plants to wilt and die.

Prevention: Use disease-resistant varieties, practice crop rotation, and treat seeds with Trichoderma.

4.6.2. Rust
This fungal disease appears as reddish pustules on leaves and stems.

Prevention: Choose resistant varieties and ensure good air circulation.

4.6.3. Powdery Mildew
This disease appears as white, powdery spots on leaves.

Prevention: Ensure good air circulation through proper spacing.

4.6.4. Alternaria Blight
This disease causes dark spots on leaves and stems.

Prevention: Use disease-free seed and practice crop rotation.

4.6.5. Dry Root Rot
This fungal disease attacks the roots, causing plants to wilt and die.

Prevention: Ensure good drainage and practice crop rotation.

4.6.6. Disease Prevention Practices
The best defense against diseases is prevention:

Resistant Varieties: Choose varieties with disease resistance.

Crop Rotation: Long rotations are essential.

Good Air Flow: Proper spacing allows air to circulate.

Clean Seed: Always use clean, disease-free, treated seed.

`,
          stage5: `Harvesting
Harvesting at the right time is critical for preserving oil quality and obtaining good fiber.

Step 5.1: Know When to Harvest
Linseed is ready for harvest at physiological maturity, when the plants turn yellow and the capsules (fruits) turn brown . For fiber crops, harvest at the red ripe stage .

Step 5.2: Check for Maturity
The capsules should be dry and the seeds inside should be hard and rattle when shaken. The seeds will have their characteristic color, ranging from golden yellow to reddish-brown .

Step 5.3: Harvesting Methods

Small Scale: Pull or cut the plants close to the ground. Tie them in small bundles and stack them to dry.

Large Scale: Use a combine harvester when the crop is dry.

Step 5.4: Deseeding
After harvesting, the seeds must be separated from the capsules. This process is called deseeding . It can be done by threshing the dried plants.

Step 5.5: For Fiber Production - Retting
If you are growing linseed for fiber, the stems need to undergo a process called retting after harvest . Retting is the process of separating the fiber from the woody parts of the stem.

Methods: There are different methods of retting, including hot water, cold water, snow, and dew retting .

Duration: The retting period is typically a few days .

Cleaning: After retting, the fibers are cleaned in running water, dried, and are then ready for scutching (beating to separate the fibers) .

Note: In rainfed areas of India, water availability is often a problem, so farmers may not opt for fiber production .

`,
          stage6: `Post-Harvest and Storage
Step 6.1: Dry the Seeds Thoroughly
After threshing, the seeds must be dried to a safe moisture level for storage. The ideal storage moisture content is about 10 to 12 percent . Spread the seeds in a thin layer in the sun to dry completely.

Step 6.2: Clean the Seeds
Clean the seeds to remove any chaff, broken capsules, or other debris.

Step 6.3: Store in Clean, Dry Conditions
Store linseed seeds in a cool, dry, well-ventilated area. Protect them from rodents and insects. Keep storage containers off the ground.

Step 6.4: Oil Content
Linseed seeds typically contain about 36 to 42 percent oil . This oil is highly valued for its omega-3 fatty acids and has many uses, from cooking oils to dietary supplements .

Step 6.5: Grain Yield
With good organic practices, you can expect a good yield of linseed grain . The actual yield will depend on your variety, soil, and growing conditions.

Step 6.6: Add Value Through Processing
Linseed offers many opportunities for value addition :

Oil: Cold-press the seeds to produce raw linseed oil for cooking or health supplements.

Flax Fiber: If you have the resources, the fiber can be processed into linen.

Innovative Products: Linseed is being explored for its potential to produce biodegradable composites, medical implants, and other products .

Step 6.7: Save Seed for Next Season
If you want to save your own seed for the next season, select the best, healthiest seeds from your harvest. Store them separately in a clean, dry container with extra care.

By following these stages, you can grow healthy, versatile linseed naturally, work with its unique low-input and soil-improving nature, and harvest a valuable crop for oil, fiber, or both without using any chemicals.
`,
                  },
        water: 'Low', 
        temp: '10-25°C', 
        duration: '100-120 days', 
        soil: 'Black soil', 
        fertilizer: 'NPK 60:40:40', 
        yield: '0.8-1.2 tons/ha' 
      }
    ],
    red: [
      { 
        id: 36, 
        name: 'Tomato', 
        image: cropImages.tomato, 
        titleDescription: 'Tomato in red soils produces flavorful fruits with good disease resistance, benefiting from excellent drainage and warm conditions during rabi season.',
        description: {
          stage1: `Land Preparation
Tomatoes are sensitive plants. They need deep, well-prepared soil that allows their roots to spread and does not hold water around their stems.

Step 1.1: Choose the Right Field
Tomatoes grow best in soil that is loamy or sandy-loam, with good drainage . The soil should be deep, loose, and well-aerated . Tomato roots absolutely cannot tolerate standing water or waterlogged conditions . If water collects in the field, the plants will develop root rots and die. Avoid heavy clay soils unless you have added large amounts of organic matter to improve them.

Step 1.2: Test the Soil First
Before you begin, it is wise to test your soil. Tomatoes have high requirements for potassium and calcium . Potassium helps with fruit development and sugar content, while calcium prevents a serious disorder called blossom end rot where the bottom of the fruit turns black and rots. A soil test will tell you if you need to add natural minerals like rock phosphate for phosphorus or gypsum for calcium . The soil pH should be neutral, between a certain range .

Step 1.3: Build Organic Matter
Tomatoes are heavy feeders, meaning they take a lot of nutrients from the soil . The best way to provide these nutrients is to build the soil with organic matter. Spread a generous layer of well-decomposed farmyard manure or compost over the field and mix it into the soil during ploughing. If you have access to vermicompost, it is excellent for tomatoes as it provides slow-release nutrients .

Step 1.4: Create Raised Beds
In many regions, tomatoes are planted on raised beds covered with plastic mulch . Raised beds improve drainage and allow the soil to warm up faster in spring. The beds should be high enough so that water never stands around the plant stems. If you are not using plastic, you can still plant on raised beds and mulch with straw later.

Step 1.5: Plan Your Rotation
Tomatoes should not be grown in the same field year after year. They are susceptible to soil-borne diseases that build up over time. Rotate with crops from different families, such as legumes or grains, to break disease cycles and maintain soil health .
`,
          stage2: `Seed Selection and Nursery Management
Tomatoes are almost always started in a nursery and then transplanted to the main field. The nursery stage is critical for getting strong, healthy seedlings.

Step 2.1: Choose Your Variety Carefully
Tomato varieties come in two main types: determinate and indeterminate . Determinate varieties grow to a certain size, set fruit all at once, and then stop. They are good for processing or if you want a single large harvest. Indeterminate varieties continue growing and producing fruit throughout the season until frost kills them. They need staking and support but provide a continuous harvest.

Choose varieties that are known to have resistance to common diseases in your area . Disease-resistant varieties are especially important in organic farming because they reduce the need for interventions. Also consider your market—some consumers prefer heirloom varieties for flavor, while others want uniform, red, firm fruits for selling.

Step 2.2: Use Quality Seeds
If possible, buy organic seeds. These seeds come from plants that were grown organically and are adapted to organic conditions . If organic seeds are not available, use untreated conventional seeds. Do not use seeds that have been treated with chemical fungicides.

Step 2.3: Start Seeds in a Nursery
Tomato seeds are small and need careful attention to germinate. Start them in a protected nursery using trays or prepared beds. Use a light, fine growing medium mixed with compost. Plant the seeds shallowly and keep them moist but not wet.

Step 2.4: Provide Good Conditions
Seeds germinate best in warm conditions. Keep the nursery warm and provide plenty of light. If seedlings become tall and spindly, they are not getting enough light. You can brush your hand over the seedlings gently once a day; this slight movement strengthens the stems and prevents them from getting too leggy .

Step 2.5: Harden Off Seedlings
About a week before transplanting, the seedlings must be hardened off. This means gradually exposing them to outdoor conditions. Move them outside for a few hours each day, increasing the time gradually. Withhold water slightly to toughen them up . This process reduces transplant shock and helps them establish quickly in the field.
`,
          stage3: `Transplanting
Step 3.1: Time Transplanting Correctly
Transplant tomatoes only after all danger of frost has passed and the soil has warmed up . Cold soil will stunt the plants and delay harvest. In many regions, this is after the last spring frost date. Transplant during the cooler part of the day, either early morning or late evening, to reduce stress on the plants.

Step 3.2: Space Plants Properly
Proper spacing is essential for good air circulation, which reduces disease . If plants are too crowded, air cannot move through the foliage, and humidity builds up, encouraging fungal diseases. The exact spacing depends on your variety, but in general, give each plant enough room so that when fully grown, the leaves of adjacent plants just touch but do not overlap heavily .

Step 3.3: Plant Deeply
Tomatoes have the unique ability to grow roots from any part of the stem that is buried. When transplanting, remove the lower leaves and plant the seedling deeply, burying a good portion of the stem . These buried stems will produce additional roots, creating a stronger root system that can take up more water and nutrients.

Step 3.4: Add Starter Nutrition
At transplanting, you can add a small amount of organic fertilizer or compost in the planting hole to give the young plant a boost. Some farmers dip the roots in a solution of beneficial fungi like Trichoderma or in a weak compost tea before planting to protect against soil diseases .

Step 3.5: Water Immediately
After transplanting, water the plants thoroughly to settle the soil around the roots and eliminate air pockets.
`,
          stage4: `Field Management During Growth
Step 4.1: Staking and Trellising
Supporting tomato plants off the ground is one of the most important practices in organic tomato farming . It keeps the foliage and fruit off the soil, reducing disease, improving air circulation, and making harvesting easier . There are several methods:

Stakes and Twine: Drive strong stakes into the ground next to each plant or every few plants. Use tomato twine to weave between the stakes and plants, creating a supportive cage that holds the plants upright . As the plants grow, add more strings at intervals.

Cages: Wire cages placed around individual plants provide support and are simple to use.

Trellises: For larger plantings, you can create a trellis system using T-posts and twine, running strings along the rows and weaving the plants through them .

Start supporting your plants early, before they fall over. Once they flop on the ground, it is difficult to lift them without damage.

Step 4.2: Pruning
Pruning is the practice of removing certain shoots to direct the plant's energy toward fruit production .

Remove Suckers: Suckers are the shoots that grow in the joint between the main stem and a branch. If left, they will grow into large side stems, making the plant bushy and reducing air flow. Remove suckers when they are small by pinching them off with your fingers . Do this when the plants are dry to avoid spreading diseases .

Remove Lower Leaves: As the plants grow, remove the lower leaves that touch the ground . These leaves are the first to be infected by soil-borne diseases. Removing them improves air flow and prevents soil splash onto the foliage during rain or irrigation.

Do Not Over-Prune: Leave enough leaves to feed the plant and shade the fruit from sunscald . The goal is a balance between open growth and enough foliage for photosynthesis.

Step 4.3: Mulching
Mulching the soil around tomato plants is highly beneficial . Apply a thick layer of organic mulch such as straw, dried leaves, or hay around the base of the plants after the soil has warmed up . Mulch does several things:

It conserves soil moisture by reducing evaporation.

It suppresses weed growth.

It prevents soil from splashing onto the lower leaves during rain, which reduces soil-borne diseases .

As it breaks down, it adds organic matter to the soil.

If you use plastic mulch, lay it before transplanting and plant through holes in the plastic .

Step 4.4: Water Management
Tomatoes need consistent moisture throughout the growing season . Fluctuations in soil moisture can cause problems like fruit cracking and blossom end rot.

Young Plants: Water frequently to help them establish.

Established Plants: Water deeply and less frequently to encourage deep root growth.

Critical Periods: The most critical times for water are during flowering and fruit development.

Method: Drip irrigation is the best method because it delivers water directly to the soil without wetting the foliage . Wet leaves encourage fungal diseases. If you water by hand, water at the base of the plant, not from overhead.

Step 4.5: Feeding the Plants
Tomatoes need a steady supply of nutrients throughout the season. In organic farming, you feed the soil, and the soil feeds the plants . Apply compost or organic fertilizers at planting and then again during the growing season as side-dressing.

Side-dressing: Place organic fertilizer or compost along the sides of the rows and gently work it into the soil, then water.

Timing: A common schedule is to side-dress when the first fruits are about the size of a nickel  and again a few weeks later.

Liquid Feeds: You can also use liquid organic fertilizers like compost tea or fish emulsion, applied every few weeks, for a quick nutrient boost .

Step 4.6: Weed Management
Weeds compete with tomatoes for water and nutrients. Use a combination of methods:

Mulch is the best weed suppressant.

Hand weeding or hoe weeding between plants and rows, especially early in the season before the plants get large .

Be careful not to damage tomato roots when cultivating close to the plants.

Step 4.7: Pest Management

4.7.1. Regular Monitoring
Walk through your field at least twice a week. Look under leaves and at growing tips for insects. Early detection is key to managing pests without chemicals.

4.7.2. Common Pests and Organic Controls

Aphids: Small insects that cluster on new growth. Spray with a strong stream of water to knock them off, or use insecticidal soap. Encourage natural predators like ladybugs .

Whiteflies: Tiny white insects that fly up when disturbed. Use yellow sticky traps to monitor and reduce populations. Neem oil sprays can help .

Tomato Hornworm: Large green caterpillars that eat leaves and fruit. They are large enough to spot and remove by hand. If you see them with white rice-like structures on their backs, leave them; these are parasitic wasp cocoons that will hatch and control more hornworms .

4.7.3. Encouraging Natural Enemies
Plant flowering plants around your field to attract beneficial insects like ladybugs, lacewings, and parasitic wasps. These natural enemies will help keep pest populations under control.

Step 4.8: Disease Management

Disease prevention is the goal in organic farming. Once a disease takes hold, it is difficult to control.

4.8.1. Prevention Practices

Resistant Varieties: Choose varieties with resistance to common diseases in your area .

Crop Rotation: Do not plant tomatoes in the same field more than once every few years.

Good Air Flow: Proper spacing, pruning, and trellising all improve air circulation and reduce humidity around leaves .

Mulch: Prevents soil from splashing onto plants.

Water Management: Keep foliage dry by using drip irrigation or watering at the base.

Sanitation: Remove and destroy any diseased plants or leaves immediately. Do not compost diseased material .

4.8.2. Common Diseases

Early Blight: Dark spots with concentric rings on lower leaves. Remove affected leaves promptly. Copper-based fungicides approved for organic use can be applied preventatively if the disease is severe .

Late Blight: A devastating disease that spreads rapidly in cool, wet weather. Use resistant varieties if possible. Copper sprays can offer some protection, but prevention is the best strategy .

Blossom End Rot: A black, sunken area on the bottom of the fruit. This is not a disease but a disorder caused by calcium deficiency combined with uneven watering . Maintain consistent soil moisture and ensure adequate calcium in the soil (from gypsum or lime).
`,
          stage5: `Harvesting
Step 5.1: Know When to Harvest
Tomatoes can be harvested at different stages depending on your market and needs.

Fully Ripe on Vine: Tomatoes left to fully ripen on the plant have the best flavor but are softer and more prone to damage and cracking . They also do not store as long.

Breaker Stage: Tomatoes harvested when they just begin to show a blush of color (the "breaker" stage) will continue to ripen off the vine . They are firmer, less prone to damage, and have a longer shelf life. Studies show that the flavor of breaker-stage tomatoes allowed to ripen indoors is similar to vine-ripened fruit .

Step 5.2: Harvest Regularly
Pick tomatoes regularly as they mature. This encourages the plant to continue producing more fruit .

Step 5.3: Handle with Great Care
Tomatoes bruise very easily. Handle them gently.

Use clean containers like buckets, baskets, or crates. Do not throw tomatoes into containers .

Do not stack tomatoes too deep, or the ones at the bottom will be crushed.

Pick in dry weather if possible. Wet fruit is more prone to rot and damage.

Step 5.4: Grade as You Harvest
Separate your tomatoes by size, quality, and ripeness as you pick them. This saves time later and ensures that only the best fruit goes to market. Remove any fruit with defects, rot, or damage.

Step 5.5: Keep Cool
After harvest, keep tomatoes in a cool, shaded place . Do not put them in direct sun. If possible, move them to a cool storage area quickly to preserve quality.
`,
          stage6: `Post-Harvest and Storage
Step 6.1: Sort and Grade
After harvest, sort your tomatoes carefully. Remove any that are cracked, rotten, or damaged. Grade the rest by size and quality. Uniform, blemish-free fruit will fetch the best price.

Step 6.2: Use Clean Containers for Market
Pack your sorted tomatoes in clean, sturdy containers for transport. Wooden crates, plastic lug boxes, or cardboard boxes can be used. Make sure containers are clean to prevent contamination . Line boxes with padding if needed to prevent bruising.

Step 6.3: Store Properly
If you cannot sell immediately, store tomatoes in a cool, well-ventilated area.

Mature green or breaker-stage tomatoes can be stored at room temperature to ripen gradually.

Fully ripe tomatoes should be used or sold soon.

Do not refrigerate tomatoes unless they are fully ripe and you need to slow further ripening. Cold temperatures destroy flavor and texture. If you must refrigerate, bring them back to room temperature before eating.

Step 6.4: Check Stored Fruit Regularly
If you are holding tomatoes for any length of time, check them daily. Remove any that are starting to rot to prevent the rot from spreading to healthy fruit.

By following these stages, you can grow healthy, flavorful tomatoes naturally, manage pests and diseases through prevention and cultural practices, and harvest a bountiful crop without using any chemicals.
`,
        },
        water: 'Medium', 
        temp: '15-25°C', 
        duration: '90-120 days', 
        soil: 'Red soil', 
        fertilizer: 'NPK 80:60:60', 
        yield: '20-25 tons/ha' 
      },
      { 
        id: 37, 
        name: 'Onion', 
        image: cropImages.onion, 
        titleDescription: 'Onion in red soils produces well-shaped bulbs with excellent storage quality, utilizing good drainage and aeration for healthy bulb development.',
        description: {
          stage1: `Land Preparation
Onions have shallow roots and need soil that is loose, fertile, and free from weeds. Getting the land ready properly is the foundation of a successful crop.

Step 1.1: Choose the Right Field
Onions grow best in well-drained, friable (easily crumbled) soil with a high content of organic matter . The soil should be loose and sandy loam, not heavy clay . The pH should be neutral to slightly acidic . Most importantly, the field must have good drainage. Onions cannot tolerate waterlogging, which causes rot.

Step 1.2: Plan Your Rotation
Onions should not follow other members of the allium family, such as garlic, shallots, or previous onion crops . This is because pests and diseases like thrips and rot can overwinter in the soil and attack the new crop. Practice a rotation of several years between allium crops .

Step 1.3: Prepare the Soil the Year Before
Ideally, begin soil preparation the year before planting. Use cover crops and compost to build soil health and organic matter . This gives the organic matter time to break down and integrate with the soil.

Step 1.4: Add Organic Matter and Amendments
Before planting, spread well-decomposed farmyard manure or compost over the field and mix it into the soil . Research has shown that using organic manures like farmyard manure, vermicompost, and liquid manures significantly improves onion growth and yield . If a soil test shows deficiencies, you can add natural amendments like lime to adjust pH, gypsum for calcium, or potassium sulfate for potassium . Avoid fresh manure, as it can cause rot .

Step 1.5: Create a Fine, Firm Seedbed
Onion seeds are small, and the plants have shallow roots. Prepare the soil to a fine tilth, breaking all clods. The seedbed must be smooth and level. For direct-seeded onions, a fine seedbed is essential for good germination.

Step 1.6: Form Raised Beds
In many regions, onions are planted on raised beds. Raised beds improve drainage, allow the soil to warm up faster in spring, and prevent compaction . The beds can be covered with plastic mulch for even better results, especially in cooler areas .

Step 1.7: Pre-Plant Weed Control
Weeds are a major challenge in onions. Before planting, you can use a stale seedbed technique. Prepare the field, water it lightly, and allow weed seeds to germinate. Then use shallow cultivation to kill those tiny weeds just before planting . This gives your onions a head start.
`,
          stage2: `Seed Selection and Treatment
Choosing the right variety and healthy seed is critical for onion success.

Step 2.1: Understand Day Length Requirements
Onions are classified by day length :

Short-day onions: Best for warm, southern regions with mild winters. They form bulbs when day length reaches a certain number of hours.

Long-day onions: Ideal for cooler, northern regions with long summer days. They need a higher number of daylight hours to form bulbs.

Intermediate-day onions: Adaptable to many regions in between.
If you plant the wrong type for your area, you will get either no bulbs or very small ones. Green onions (bunching onions) can be grown at any latitude because they are harvested before bulb formation .

Step 2.2: Choose Your Propagation Method
Onions can be grown from seeds, transplants, or sets (small bulbs) .

Seeds: Cheapest, widest variety choice, but take longer to mature.

Transplants: Started indoors and then moved to the field. Give a head start and more uniform crop.

Sets: Easy to plant and mature quickly, but more expensive and limited variety choice.

Step 2.3: Obtain Quality Propagation Material
Use certified seed or transplants from a reliable source . If you are growing from sets, obtain them from a reputable supplier. Do not use supermarket onions for planting, as they may be from a different region or treated with sprout inhibitors .

Step 2.4: Treat Seeds for Disease Prevention
To protect young seedlings from soil-borne diseases, you can treat the seeds with Trichoderma, a friendly fungus. For bacterial diseases, some growers use hot water treatment on seeds . If you are using transplants, you can drench the trays with a solution of beneficial microbes like Streptomyces before transplanting to prevent pathogens .

Step 2.5: Start Seeds Indoors (for Transplants)
If growing transplants, start seeds in greenhouses or protected areas using cell plug trays . Use a fine growing medium. Keep them warm for good germination. When seedlings are growing, if they show nutrient deficiency, feed with an organic liquid fertilizer . If the tops get too tall and flop over, you can clip them back—this is called giving them a "haircut" .

Step 2.6: Harden Off Transplants
Before transplanting, plants must be hardened off. This means gradually exposing them to outdoor conditions for about a week, reducing water slightly, and allowing them to toughen up . Lush, soft plants do not perform well in the field .
`,
          stage3: `Planting
Step 3.1: Plant at the Right Time
The planting time depends on your method and region.

Seeds: Start indoors several weeks before the last frost . Direct seed in early spring or late winter.

Transplants: Plant in early spring as soon as the soil can be worked .

Sets: Plant in early spring.
In warm regions, onions can be planted in autumn for a spring harvest .

Step 3.2: Space Plants Properly
Proper spacing is essential for good bulb size. Onions cannot be given too much space—if spaced too far apart, they become very large but have a higher incidence of bacterial rot .

Between rows: Generally 12 to 18 inches apart .

Between plants: For individual transplants, about 4 inches apart . For clumps of multiple seedlings, space clumps about 9 inches apart . For sets, space 4-6 inches apart .
Green onions grown for bunching can be spaced closer, about 1-2 inches apart .

Step 3.3: Plant at the Correct Depth
Plant transplants and sets at the correct depth. Do not plant too deep. The base of the plant should be at soil level, with the roots covered. If planted too deep, the bulb may not form properly or may rot . For sets, plant about an inch deep with the tip just showing .

Step 3.4: Use Plastic Mulch (Optional)
Planting in plastic mulch can increase onion yields . The plastic warms the soil earlier in spring, leading to bigger onions. Drip irrigation can be used along with the mulch to improve soil moisture. Some growers use plastic with a silver strip to repel thrips .

Step 3.5: Water Immediately After Planting
After transplanting or planting sets, water thoroughly to settle the soil around the roots and eliminate air pockets.
`,
          stage4: `Field Management During Growth
Onions need consistent care, especially with water and weed control.

Step 4.1: Water Management
Onions need a continuous supply of moisture when actively growing .

Young Plants: Keep soil consistently moist to help them establish .

Bulb Formation: As bulbs begin to swell, maintain even moisture. Fluctuations in watering can cause cracking or poor development.

Late Season: When onions start to mature and the tops begin to fall over (lodge), reduce watering and then stop completely about one to two weeks before harvest . This helps prevent rot and improves storage quality.

Method: Drip irrigation is best because it delivers water to the roots without wetting the foliage, reducing disease .

Step 4.2: Mulching
Apply organic mulch like straw, dried leaves, or grass clippings around the plants . Mulch:

Conserves soil moisture.

Suppresses weeds, which is critical for onions.

Keeps the soil cool.

Prevents soil from splashing onto the plants, reducing soil-borne diseases .
For plastic mulch, ensure that the holes around the plants are wide enough so the plastic does not touch and burn the onions .

Step 4.3: Weed Management
Weeds are the biggest challenge in onion production because onions are poor competitors .

Early Control: Use shallow cultivation with a basket weeder, wheel hoe, or finger weeders when weeds are small . This is most effective before weeds emerge.

Hand Weeding: Remove weeds that grow close to the onion plants by hand .

Mulch: A thick layer of organic mulch suppresses most weeds.

Step 4.4: Nutrition and Feeding
Onions are heavy feeders, especially during leaf growth .

Basal Dressing: The compost and organic amendments added at planting provide a good base.

Liquid Feeds: During growth, apply liquid organic fertilizers like compost tea, liquid seaweed, or fermented plant juices every few weeks . Some farmers spray the leaves with liquid fish or seaweed fertilizers, but this should be done before the fourth or fifth leaf, using a spreader sticker to help it stick to the waxy leaves .

Stop Nitrogen at Bulbing: Do not apply nitrogen when the bulbs are beginning to enlarge. Excess nitrogen at this stage encourages leafy growth at the expense of bulb size and can increase disease pressure .

Step 4.5: Pest Management

*4.5.1. Onion Thrips - The Most Serious Pest*
Thrips are tiny insects that rasp the leaves, causing silvery patches and reducing yield. They are the main pest of onions .

Prevention: Use silver reflective mulch to repel thrips . Plant away from garlic fields where thrips may overwinter .

Monitoring: Check plants regularly. Act when pest pressure is still low.

Organic Controls: Use spinosad-based products, Beauveria bassiana (a beneficial fungus), or mineral oil sprays . These products require direct contact with the pest, so spray at night when thrips are active. Repeat applications every few days as needed . Neem oil can also help .

4.5.2. Onion Maggots
These are fly larvae that tunnel into the bulbs.

Prevention: Use floating row covers to physically exclude the adult flies . Practice long crop rotations.

4.5.3. Cutworms
These caterpillars cut young seedlings at the base.

Control: Remove mulch from around affected plants to expose them to predators. Hand-pick if seen.

4.5.4. Allium Leaf Miners
These pests tunnel in leaves and bulbs.

Control: Follow local guidance on when to use exclusion netting to prevent infestation .

Step 4.6: Disease Management

Disease prevention is the goal. Healthy, unstressed plants are less susceptible.

4.6.1. Prevention Practices

Crop Rotation: Long rotations of several years are essential .

Good Air Flow: Proper spacing and weed control allow air to circulate, reducing humidity.

Water Management: Avoid overhead irrigation late in the season. Keep foliage dry .

Sanitation: Remove and destroy diseased plant material. Do not compost it .

Resistant Varieties: Choose disease-resistant varieties when possible.

4.6.2. Fungal Diseases (Purple Blotch, Downy Mildew, Botrytis, Powdery Mildew)
These cause spots on leaves and can kill foliage, reducing yield . Purple blotch is worse in warm, humid conditions on plants weakened by thrips .

Control: Follow all prevention practices above. Keep thrips under control. If necessary, use approved organic fungicides like copper or sulfur-based products, but use them carefully.

4.6.3. Bacterial Diseases (Bacterial Bulb Rot, Xanthomonas Leaf Blight)
These cause rotting of the bulb, often developing between harvest and storage .

Prevention: Avoid damage to onions during harvest. Do not top onions prematurely. If topping is necessary, wait until most tops have lodged and leave a good length of stem above the bulb . Avoid excessive nitrogen and low plant populations, which increase disease pressure. Harvest when onions are fully mature .
`,
          stage5: `Harvesting
Onions can be harvested at two stages: as green onions (with tops) or as mature, cured bulbs.

Step 5.1: Harvesting Green Onions
Green onions (scallions) are harvested when the tops are green and the bulbs are small, about pencil size to half an inch in diameter . They are ready as soon as they reach edible size . Harvest by pulling them gently, grabbing low on the stem to avoid crushing the greens . Clean off any yellow leaves, and trim the roots .

Step 5.2: Harvesting Mature Bulbs
Mature onions are ready to harvest when the tops turn yellow, dry, and fall over naturally (lodge) . This usually occurs when a large percentage of the leaves have lodged . The bulbs should be firm and have the characteristic size and color for the variety.

Step 5.3: Harvest with Care
On a dry day, gently loosen the soil with a fork or shovel, then pull the onions out by the tops. Handle them carefully to avoid bruising or damaging the bulbs, as damage leads to rot in storage .

Step 5.4: Field Curing
After harvest, leave the onions in the field or move them to a dry, shaded, well-ventilated area to cure . Spread them in a single layer, with the tops still attached. Curing allows the outer skins to dry and tighten, and the neck to seal, which protects the bulb during storage. Cure for one to three weeks, depending on weather and humidity .

Step 5.5: Topping
After curing, the roots and tops can be trimmed. Cut the roots close to the bulb, and cut the tops back, leaving about an inch of stem . For green onions, roots are trimmed to about half an inch .
`,
          stage6: `Post-Harvest and Storage
Step 6.1: Sort and Grade
Sort onions by size and quality. Remove any with thick necks (which indicate they are not fully mature and will not store well), soft bulbs, or signs of rot. Uniform, firm, well-cured onions store best and fetch the best price.

Step 6.2: Storage Conditions
Onions store best in a cool, dry, and well-ventilated area .

Temperature: Cool but not freezing, ideally around 32-40°F .

Humidity: Low to moderate humidity, around 60-70% .

Containers: Use mesh bags, baskets, or cardboard boxes that allow air circulation . Do not store in plastic bags, which trap moisture.

Step 6.3: Protect from Ethylene
Keep onions away from fruits and vegetables that produce ethylene gas, such as apples and pears, as this can cause onions to sprout or spoil .

Step 6.4: Check Stored Onions
Periodically check stored onions and remove any that show signs of sprouting or rot to prevent spread to the rest of the crop.

Step 6.5: Saving Seed
If you want to save onion seeds, you need to allow some bulbs to overwinter and replant them in the spring. They will flower and produce seed in their second year. This is an advanced technique best left to experienced growers.

By following these stages, you can grow healthy, flavorful onions naturally, manage the unique challenges of day length, thrips, and diseases, and harvest a bountiful crop that stores well without using any chemicals.
`,        },
        water: 'Medium', 
        temp: '13-25°C', 
        duration: '100-120 days', 
        soil: 'Red soil', 
        fertilizer: 'NPK 80:60:80', 
        yield: '15-20 tons/ha' 
      },
      { 
        id: 38, 
        name: 'Chilli', 
        image: cropImages.chilli, 
        titleDescription: 'Chilli in red soils produces pungent fruits with good color, benefiting from excellent drainage and warm conditions essential for quality spice production.',
        description: {
          stage1: `Land Preparation
Chillies are not too demanding, but they need well-prepared soil to establish their shallow root systems.

Step 1.1: Choose the Right Field
Chillies grow best in well-drained sandy loam soil that is rich in organic matter . The soil should be deep and loose, with a pH that is neutral to slightly acidic, around 6 to 7 . The most important requirement is good drainage. Chilli roots absolutely cannot tolerate waterlogging or standing water. If water collects around the base, the plants will wilt and die from root rots.

Step 1.2: Understand the Climate Needs
Chillies love warmth and humidity. They grow best in temperatures that are warm but not too hot, ideally between 20 to 25 degrees Celsius . They are sensitive to cold and frost, which can kill the plants. Choose a field that gets full sun and is protected from strong winds.

Step 1.3: Prepare the Soil Well
Start by ploughing the field to a good depth to loosen the soil and allow roots to penetrate. After the first ploughing, do repeated harrowing to bring the soil to a fine tilth . A fine, crumbly seedbed is essential for good root development. Level the field well to ensure even water distribution.

Step 1.4: Encourage Weed Seeds to Sprout
A smart technique used by experienced chilli farmers is to prepare the soil and then wait for pre-monsoon showers. The rain will encourage weed seeds to sprout. Before transplanting, do a shallow harrowing to destroy these young weeds . This gives your chillies a weed-free start.

Step 1.5: Add Organic Manure and Amendments
During final ploughing, spread well-decomposed farmyard manure or vermicompost over the field and mix it into the soil. Research has shown that a combination of vermicompost and bio-fertilizers gives the best results for chilli growth and yield . If your soil is acidic, you may need to add dolomite or lime to stabilize the pH, as recommended for some regions .

Step 1.6: Apply Neem Cake for Pest Control
Many organic chilli farmers apply neem cake to the soil during land preparation. Neem cake helps control soil pests like cutworms and root grubs . Spread it over the field and let it get wet by rain before transplanting. This gives the neem cake time to start working.

Step 1.7: Form Raised Beds
In many regions, chillies are planted on raised beds. Raised beds improve drainage, allow the soil to warm up faster, and make mulching easier. For high-rainfall areas, raised beds are essential to prevent waterlogging . The beds can be covered with plastic mulch for even better results.

Step 1.8: Plan Your Spacing
The spacing between plants depends on your variety and the fertility of your soil. In general, give each plant enough room to grow into a bushy shrub. A common spacing is about two to three feet between rows and one to two feet between plants . Wider spacing allows more air movement, which reduces disease.
`,
          stage2: ` Seed Selection and Nursery Management
Chillies are almost always started in a nursery and then transplanted. The nursery stage is critical for getting healthy, vigorous seedlings.

Step 2.1: Choose the Right Variety
There are hundreds of chilli varieties, suited for different purposes and regions . Some are grown for fresh green chillies, some for drying into red spice, and some for their extreme heat. Choose a variety that suits your market and your climate. Some improved varieties like Arka Meghana and Arka Sweta have been developed with tolerance to viruses and powdery mildew, making them ideal for organic farming .

Step 2.2: Obtain Quality Seed
Use certified seed from a reliable source, or save your own seed from a healthy, disease-free crop. If saving your own seed, select fruits from the best plants, looking for desirable characters like fruit length, color, and freedom from disease .

Step 2.3: Plant Seeds in a Nursery
Chilli seeds are small and need careful attention to germinate. Start them in a protected nursery using raised beds or trays. Use a fine growing medium mixed with compost. Plant the seeds shallowly and cover them lightly with fine soil. Keep the nursery moist but not wet.

Step 2.4: Time Your Nursery Planting
In most regions, chilli seeds are sown in the nursery during March to April . The seedlings will be ready for transplanting in about 30 to 35 days . Time your nursery so that seedlings are ready to go into the field when conditions are favorable.

Step 2.5: Treat Seeds with Trichoderma
Before sowing in the nursery, treat the seeds with Trichoderma powder, a friendly fungus that protects against soil-borne diseases. Mix the seeds with Trichoderma at a rate of about 10 grams per kilogram of seeds . This helps prevent damping off and other seedling diseases.

Step 2.6: Apply VAM to Nursery Beds
Just before sowing, some farmers apply VAM (Vesicular Arbuscular Mycorrhiza) inoculum to the nursery beds . VAM is a beneficial fungus that lives on roots and helps the plant access phosphorus and other nutrients. This gives the seedlings a healthy start.

Step 2.7: Care for Seedlings
Keep the nursery free of weeds. Water regularly but gently. If seedlings are weak, you can apply a diluted liquid fertilizer like compost tea. Healthy seedlings should be stocky and dark green, not tall and spindly.

Step 2.8: Harden Off Seedlings
About a week before transplanting, gradually expose seedlings to outdoor conditions. Reduce watering slightly to toughen them up. This reduces transplant shock and helps them establish quickly in the field.

Step 2.9: Prune Seedlings Before Transplanting
A traditional practice among experienced chilli growers is to clip and prune the seedlings just before transplanting. They trim back some of the leaves and the growing tip. This helps the seedlings withstand adverse weather during transplanting and induces more uniform growth and shape in the plants .
`,
          stage3: `Transplanting
Step 3.1: Plant at the Right Time
Transplant chilli seedlings when all danger of frost has passed and the weather has warmed up. In most regions, transplanting is done during July, with the onset of the monsoon . Transplant during the cooler part of the day, either early morning or late evening, to reduce stress.

Step 3.2: Prepare the Field for Transplanting
Before transplanting, mark the rows or planting holes according to your planned spacing. If you are using plastic mulch, lay it at least a week before transplanting to allow the soil to warm up . Make holes in the mulch at the proper spacing.

Step 3.3: Apply Starter Nutrients at Planting
At the time of transplanting, apply a mixture of vermicompost and bio-fertilizers like Azospirillum and Phosphobacteria in the planting holes . This gives the young plants a boost of nutrients and beneficial microbes right at their roots.

Step 3.4: Plant at the Right Depth
Plant seedlings at the same depth they were growing in the nursery. Do not bury the stem too deep, as this can cause rotting. Firm the soil gently around the roots to eliminate air pockets.

Step 3.5: Water Immediately
After transplanting, water the plants thoroughly to settle the soil around the roots. This is called the planting water and is essential for good establishment.

Step 3.6: Use Mulch for Weed Control
Mulching is highly recommended for chilli, especially in high-rainfall areas. Black plastic mulch (about 25 microns thick) suppresses excessive weed growth during the monsoon months and conserves soil moisture during dry periods . Mulch also keeps the fruits clean and prevents soil from splashing onto the leaves, which reduces disease .
`,
          stage4: `Field Management During Growth
Chillies have a long growing season and need consistent care through several stages: vegetative growth, flowering, fruit set, and harvest.

Step 4.1: Water Management
Chillies need consistent moisture throughout the growing season, but they do not like wet feet .

Young Plants: Water regularly to help them establish.

Growing Season: Keep the soil evenly moist. Fluctuations in watering can cause flower drop and poor fruit set.

Method: Drip irrigation is best because it delivers water directly to the roots without wetting the foliage. If you water by hand, water at the base of the plant, not from overhead.

Avoid Over-Watering: Too much water can cause bacterial wilt and other diseases .

Step 4.2: Weed Management
Weeds compete with chilli for water and nutrients. The mulch you applied will suppress most weeds, but some may still appear.

Hand-pull any weeds that grow through the mulch or close to the plants.

Keep the field clean, especially in the early stages when plants are small.

The mulch technology demonstrated in Sikkim significantly reduced labor costs by controlling weed infestation .

Step 4.3: Foliar Sprays for Growth and Yield
Research has shown that foliar sprays of liquid organic fertilizers can significantly increase chilli yields.

Seaweed Extract: Spraying seaweed extract (like IFFCO-Sagarika) at three stages—about one month after transplanting, at pre-flowering, and at post-flowering—has been shown to nearly double yields compared to traditional practices .

Panchagavya: Spraying Panchagavya, a traditional mixture of cow products, at regular intervals helps improve growth and yield .

Cow Urine: Regular sprays of cow urine (diluted with water) help control pests and strengthen plants .

Step 4.4: Nutrition and Feeding
Chillies are medium to heavy feeders and need a steady supply of nutrients.

Basal Dressing: The compost and organic amendments you added at planting provide a good base.

Top Dressing: During the growing season, you can apply additional compost or vermicompost around the plants. Research shows that applying vermicompost along with bio-fertilizers gives the best results .

Liquid Feeds: In addition to foliar sprays, you can apply liquid organic fertilizers like compost tea or fermented plant juices to the soil every few weeks.

Panchagavya Application: A study showed that applying Panchagavya as a foliar spray along with other organic nutrients resulted in high quality parameters like oleoresin content and color value .

Step 4.5: Support Plants with Staking
As chilli plants grow and become loaded with fruits, they may need support. In some systems, plants are attached to sticks or stakes to prevent them from falling over . This is especially important for tall varieties and in windy areas.

Step 4.6: Grow Border Crops
Many organic chilli farmers plant border crops around their fields. A mixture of maize, castor, and marigold planted as a border serves multiple purposes :

It acts as a physical barrier, preventing contamination from neighboring farms.

It traps pests, keeping them away from the chilli.

Marigold flowers can be sold in local markets for extra income during festive seasons .

Step 4.7: Pest Management

Pests are the biggest challenge in organic chilli farming. The main pests are thrips, mites, aphids, whiteflies, and fruit borers . Regular monitoring is essential.

4.7.1. Thrips
Thrips are tiny insects that feed on leaves and flowers, causing leaves to curl upwards and become brittle. Infested buds may drop off .

Prevention: Use a prophylactic spray of neem-based products at regular intervals of 3-5 weeks .

Control: If you see thrips, spray a mixture of botanical extracts. Repeat after 5-7 days if needed .

4.7.2. Mites
Mites cause leaves to curl downwards, forming a boat-like shape. Affected leaves become brittle and may have blister patches on the underside. In severe cases, plants are stunted .

Control: Use the same botanical spray regimen as for thrips .

4.7.3. Aphids
Aphids are small insects that suck sap from plants, causing leaf curling. They also transmit viruses .

Control: Spray neem oil or other botanical extracts. Research has shown that extracts from plants like nutmeg can also be effective against aphids .

Natural Predators: Encourage ladybugs and other predators by maintaining flowering plants around the field.

4.7.4. Whiteflies
Whiteflies suck plant sap and secrete honeydew, on which sooty mold grows. They are also vectors of leaf curl virus .

Control: Use the same botanical spray regimen as for other sucking pests .

4.7.5. Fruit Borer (Helicoverpa)
The fruit borer is a caterpillar that feeds on fruits, thrusting its head inside and leaving its body outside. Fecal material inside the fruit is a clear sign .

Control: Spray botanical extracts that target caterpillars. Research has shown that a combination of Verticillium lecanii (a beneficial fungus) and NSKE (neem seed kernel extract) at different stages can effectively control fruit borer .

Monitoring: Check plants regularly and remove any affected fruits.

4.7.6. Fruit Flies
Fruit flies lay eggs inside fruits, causing them to rot. This is a serious pest in some regions .

Control: Use fruit fly traps to capture the adult flies. Remove and destroy any infected fruits .

4.7.7. Integrated Pest Management
Research from the University of Agricultural Sciences, Dharwad, developed an effective organic pest management schedule for chilli :

Spray Verticillium lecanii (a beneficial fungus) mixed with NSKE (neem seed kernel extract) at 20 and 60 days after transplanting.

Spray sulphur mixed with NSKE at 40 days after transplanting.

Spray Trichoderma harzianum (a beneficial fungus) mixed with NSKE at 80 days after transplanting.
This schedule significantly reduced fruit borer damage and "murda complex" (a complex of pests and diseases causing dieback) .

Step 4.8: Disease Management

4.8.1. Damping Off
This fungal disease kills seedlings in the nursery.

Prevention: Use well-drained nursery beds and treat seeds with Trichoderma.

4.8.2. Powdery Mildew and Mosaic Virus
These are common diseases in chilli. Powdery mildew appears as white powder on leaves. Mosaic virus causes mottled leaves and stunted growth.

Resistant Varieties: Choose varieties like Arka Meghana (tolerant to powdery mildew and mosaic virus) and Arka Sweta (virus tolerant) .

Control: Spray neem-based products. Remove and destroy any severely infected plants.

4.8.3. Anthracnose or Fruit Rot
This fungal disease causes dark spots on fruits, especially in wet weather.

Prevention: Ensure good air circulation through proper spacing. Avoid overhead irrigation.

Control: Spray neem-based products. Research has shown that a combination of cow urine, neem oil, and Pseudomonas (a beneficial bacterium) sprayed alternately at regular intervals can control anthracnose .

4.8.4. Bacterial Wilt
This disease causes plants to wilt and die suddenly. It is worse in wet conditions.

Prevention: Ensure good drainage. Do not plant in fields with a history of wilt. Use disease-free seedlings.

Control: Remove and destroy infected plants immediately. Do not compost them.

4.8.5. Murda Complex
This is a complex of pests and diseases that causes dieback and stunting. The integrated pest management schedule described above, using Verticillium, sulphur, and Trichoderma at specific intervals, has been shown to effectively control murda complex .
`,
          stage5: `Harvesting
Chilli is unique because you can harvest it at different stages, and each stage has a different market.

Step 5.1: Harvesting Green Chillies
Green chillies are harvested when the fruits are fully developed but still green and before they start turning red. They are used fresh as a vegetable. Harvesting begins about 90 to 120 days after transplanting . Green chillies are usually harvested every 7 to 10 days.

Step 5.2: Harvesting Red Ripe Chillies
If you want to dry chillies for spice, leave them on the plant until they turn completely red and start to shrivel slightly. Red chillies have higher capsaicin content and are used for making powder, pickles, and pastes .

Step 5.3: Multiple Harvests
Chilli plants produce fruits over a long period. Farmers typically harvest multiple times, from 3 to 8 pickings, as the fruits mature . Regular harvesting encourages the plant to produce more flowers and fruits.

Step 5.4: Harvest with Care
Use sharp pruners or scissors to cut the fruits, leaving a small piece of stem attached. Do not pull or twist the fruits, as this can damage the plant. Handle the fruits gently to avoid bruising.

Step 5.5: Harvest in Cool Conditions
Harvest in the cool of the morning if possible, and keep harvested chillies out of direct sun to prevent wilting.

Step 5.6: Wear Gloves
When harvesting hot varieties, wear gloves to protect your hands from capsaicin, which can burn skin and eyes.
`,
          stage6: `Post-Harvest and Storage
Step 6.1: Sort and Grade
Sort chillies by size, color, and quality. Remove any that are damaged, diseased, or misshapen. Uniform, brightly colored chillies will fetch the best price.

Step 6.2: For Fresh Market Green Chillies
Green chillies are perishable and should be marketed soon after harvest. Keep them in a cool, shaded place. If you need to store them short-term, keep them in a cool, humid environment, but not too cold, as they are sensitive to chilling injury.

Step 6.3: Drying Red Chillies
If you are producing dried chillies, drying must be done carefully to preserve color and quality.

Spread the red chillies in a thin layer on clean mats, tarpaulins, or a clean cemented floor in the sun.

Turn them regularly so they dry evenly.

Dry until the chillies are brittle and have lost most of their moisture.

In humid conditions, artificial drying may be necessary to prevent mold.

Step 6.4: Processed Products
Red chillies can be processed into powder, paste, or pickles to add value and extend shelf life. The growing demand for organic and naturally processed spices has increased the economic value of chilli products .

Step 6.5: Store Dried Chillies
Store dried chillies in airtight containers or clean gunny bags in a cool, dry place away from light. Protect them from moisture and insects. Check stored chillies periodically for any signs of mold or pests.

Step 6.6: Market Linkages
Access to good markets is critical for profitability. In the Sikkim success story, farmers who had better access to the Mangan market earned higher profits than those selling in more remote markets . Explore local markets, aggregation centers, and potential export opportunities for premium organic chillies.

By following these stages, you can grow healthy, productive chilli plants naturally, manage the complex of pests and diseases that attack chilli, and harvest a bountiful crop that can be sold fresh or processed into high-value products without using any chemicals.
`,
                  },
        water: 'Medium', 
        temp: '20-25°C', 
        duration: '120-150 days', 
        soil: 'Red soil', 
        fertilizer: 'NPK 80:60:60', 
        yield: '10-15 tons/ha' 
      },
      { 
        id: 39, 
        name: 'Chickpea', 
        image: cropImages.chickpea, 
        titleDescription: 'Chickpea in red soils produces quality protein-rich grains, utilizing good drainage and aeration for healthy root development and nitrogen fixation.',
        description: {
          stage1: `Land Preparation
Chickpeas are not demanding crops, but they are very sensitive to certain soil conditions. Getting the land right is the first step to success.

Step 1.1: Choose the Right Field
Chickpeas grow best in soils that are well-drained and not too heavy. They absolutely cannot stand waterlogging. If water stands in the field, the roots will rot and the plants will die. Soils that are light to medium in texture, with good structure, are ideal. Avoid heavy clay soils that hold water for long periods. The soil should be neutral to slightly alkaline, not acidic. If the soil is too acidic, the plants will not grow well and the nitrogen-fixing bacteria on their roots will not work properly .

Step 1.2: Deep Ploughing for Deep Roots
Chickpeas send a deep taproot into the soil. Start with a deep ploughing using a soil-turning plough. This breaks any hard pans or compacted layers below the surface, allowing the taproot to penetrate deeply and access moisture stored in the subsoil .

Step 1.3: Create a Fine, Firm Seedbed
After deep ploughing, do two or three harrowings or ploughings with a country plough. After each ploughing, do planking. Planking means dragging a heavy wooden plank over the field to break clods and level the surface. The goal is a seedbed that is fine and firm, not too fluffy. A firm seedbed ensures that all seeds are planted at a uniform depth and have good contact with the soil. This is especially important for chickpeas because they are planted after the rains, on stored soil moisture.

Step 1.4: Time Your Preparation Correctly
In many regions, chickpeas are grown in the rabi (winter) season on moisture left over from the monsoon. Land preparation must be timed carefully. The first seedbed preparation can be done early, but the final preparation should happen when the soil has the right moisture—not too wet, not too dry. If the soil is too wet, it will become compacted. If too dry, it will be hard to work. Wait for the soil to dry enough after the monsoon rains so that it is workable but still has good moisture below .

Step 1.5: Add Organic Manure
During the final ploughing, spread well-decomposed farmyard manure or compost over the field and mix it into the soil . Research has shown that applying farmyard manure significantly improves the growth and yield of chickpeas compared to no manure . The manure should be well-rotted, not fresh.

Step 1.6: Level the Field
A well-leveled field ensures that any irrigation or rainfall spreads evenly and does not collect in low spots. Use a leveller to make the field as flat as possible. Chickpeas are especially sensitive to water collection around their stems.
`,
          stage2: `Seed Selection and Treatment
Chickpea seeds are relatively large, with a wrinkled surface and a pointed tip. The seed is the most important input, and it must be treated carefully to protect it from soil-borne diseases.

Step 2.1: Select the Right Variety
Choose a variety that is suited to your region and your growing season. Some varieties mature early, some take longer. In areas with a short growing season, choose an early-maturing variety. Also consider whether you want to harvest green chickpeas for fresh eating or wait for the dried grain.

Step 2.2: Obtain Good Quality Seed
Use certified seed from a reliable source, or save your own seed from a healthy, disease-free crop. The seeds should be plump, uniform in size, and free from cracks, discoloration, or damage. Avoid seeds that are shriveled or have small holes.

Step 2.3: Soak Seeds Before Sowing
A simple but effective treatment is to soak the seeds in plain water for some time before sowing. This enhances the germination percentage by hydrating the seed and activating the embryo .

Step 2.4: Treat with Sour Buttermilk
A traditional method to control wilt and root rot diseases is to treat the seeds with sour buttermilk. Mix the seeds with well-fermented, sour butter milk and then dry them in the shade before sowing. The acidic nature of the buttermilk creates an environment that suppresses disease-causing fungi in the soil around the seed .

Step 2.5: Treat with Turmeric and Sweet Flag
Another traditional treatment is to smear the seeds with a mixture of turmeric powder and sweet flag powder. Mix these powders with a little water to make a paste, coat the seeds, and sow after a short time. This enhances the disease resistance of the crop .

Step 2.6: Treat with Trichoderma
For extra protection against soil-borne diseases, treat the seeds with Trichoderma powder, a friendly fungus that lives on the seed coat and fights off harmful fungi. Moisten the seeds slightly, then add the powder and mix until all seeds are coated.

Step 2.7: Inoculate with Rhizobium
Chickpeas need a specific type of Rhizobium bacteria to form nodules on their roots and fix nitrogen from the air. If chickpeas have not been grown in your field recently, the right bacteria may not be present in sufficient numbers. Treat the seeds with the specific Rhizobium culture for chickpeas just before planting. This ensures that millions of the right bacteria are right there on the seed, ready to infect the roots and form nitrogen-fixing nodules .
`,
          stage3: `Planting
Planting at the right time and depth is critical for chickpeas because they depend on stored soil moisture.

Step 3.1: Plant at the Right Time
Chickpeas are typically planted in the rabi season, after the monsoon rains have ended and the soil has sufficient moisture. In many regions, this is from October to November. Planting too early can expose the crop to excess moisture and disease. Planting too late means the soil may be too dry, and the crop may not have enough time to mature before temperatures rise in spring.

Step 3.2: Plant at the Right Depth
Plant chickpea seeds at a medium depth, not too shallow and not too deep. If planted too shallow, the seed may dry out or be eaten by birds. If planted too deep, the seedling may not have enough energy to reach the surface. A depth of about two inches is generally good .

Step 3.3: Maintain Proper Spacing
The space between rows and between plants affects how well the crop grows and how much it yields.

Between Rows: Rows should be spaced so that there is enough room for the plants to grow without competing too much for moisture, but close enough that the canopy covers the ground and suppresses weeds. A spacing of about 12 to 18 inches between rows is common .

Between Plants: Within the row, plants should be spaced a few inches apart . If they are too crowded, they will compete and yields will suffer. If too spaced out, weeds will take over.
Research has shown that closer spacing can give higher yields, but the best spacing depends on your variety and soil conditions .

Step 3.4: Line Sowing is Best
Sowing in straight lines using a seed drill or by dropping seeds in furrows opened by a country plough is better than broadcasting. Line sowing ensures uniform depth and spacing, makes weeding easier, and gives each plant an equal chance to grow.

Step 3.5: Cover the Seeds
After dropping the seeds, cover them with soil. This can be done by passing a light plank over the field or by using a small country plough to push soil back into the furrows. The covering should be uniform so that all seeds emerge at the same time.

Step 3.6: Do Not Irrigate Immediately
Chickpeas are grown on residual moisture. If you have planted at the right time into soil with good moisture, you should not need to irrigate immediately. In fact, too much water at this stage can cause the seeds to rot.
`,
          stage4: `Field Management During Growth
Chickpeas are a low-maintenance crop once established, but they need attention at certain stages.

Step 4.1: Watch for Emergence
The seeds will sprout and emerge within one to two weeks, depending on soil temperature and moisture . Walk through the field after emergence and look for any gaps. If there are large gaps, you may need to replant those spots, but this is difficult after the crop has started.

Step 4.2: Weed Management
Weeds compete with young chickpeas for moisture and nutrients. However, chickpeas are not very competitive against weeds, so you must keep the field clean in the early stages.

Mechanical Weeding: Use a hoe or cultivator between the rows to cut weeds. This is best done when the chickpeas are small, before they start flowering .

Timing: The first weeding should be done about three to four weeks after sowing. A second weeding may be needed later, depending on weed growth.

Care: Be careful not to damage the chickpea plants or their shallow roots when weeding.

Step 4.3: Understanding Nitrogen Fixation
About a month after planting, gently dig up a few chickpea plants and look at the roots. You should see small round nodules attached to the roots. Slice a few open with your fingernail. If they are pink or red inside, your inoculation worked perfectly, and the bacteria are actively fixing nitrogen from the air for the plant. This is a sign of a healthy crop.

Step 4.4: Water Management
Chickpeas are drought-tolerant and generally do not need irrigation if grown on good residual moisture. In fact, they prefer dry conditions once established. However, if there is a prolonged dry spell during flowering and pod filling, and if you have irrigation available, a single light irrigation can help. Do not over-water, and do not irrigate late in the season, as this can encourage diseases and delay maturity.

Step 4.5: Pest Management

Chickpeas do not suffer from many pests, but there are a few to watch for.

4.5.1. Pod Borer
The main pest of chickpeas is the pod borer, a caterpillar that feeds on the developing pods and grains. Walk through the field and look for holes in pods or caterpillars on the plants.

Monitoring: Check your field regularly, especially during flowering and pod formation.

Neem Spray: If you see pod borer damage, spray a neem-based solution on the plants. Neem repels and disrupts the feeding of many caterpillars.

Encourage Natural Enemies: Maintain flowering plants on field borders to attract beneficial insects like parasitic wasps that attack pod borers.

4.5.2. Cutworms
Cutworms are caterpillars that cut young seedlings at the base. They are more common in fields with heavy crop residue.

If you see cutworm damage, remove any mulch or residue from around the base of affected plants to expose the caterpillars to birds and sun.

Step 4.6: Disease Management

Diseases are a bigger challenge in chickpeas than pests, especially wilt and root rots.

4.6.1. Wilt and Root Rot
These are fungal diseases that cause plants to wilt and die. They are most common in soils that are too wet or in fields where chickpeas have been grown too often.

Prevention is Key: The best control is prevention through crop rotation. Do not grow chickpeas in the same field more than once every three to four years .

Seed Treatment: The seed treatments described earlier (buttermilk, turmeric, Trichoderma) are your main defense against these diseases.

Remove Infected Plants: If you see a plant wilting and dying, pull it out and destroy it. This removes the source of infection from the field.

4.6.2. Mildew and Botrytis
In prolonged wet weather, chickpeas can suffer from powdery mildew or grey mold (Botrytis) . These fungal diseases appear as white powdery spots or grey fuzzy growth on leaves and pods.

Good Air Flow: Proper spacing and weed control help air circulate through the crop, reducing humidity and the risk of these diseases.

Remove Affected Parts: If you see disease starting, remove affected leaves or plants to slow the spread.

Sulfur Spray: In severe cases, a sulfur-based spray approved for organic farming can be used.

4.6.3. Bacterial Blights
Bacterial diseases can also affect chickpeas, causing spots on leaves and pods.

Crop Rotation: Rotating crops and composting old plant debris helps manage bacterial diseases .

Do Not Work in Wet Fields: Avoid walking through or working in the field when the plants are wet, as this can spread bacterial diseases.
`,
          stage5: `Harvesting
Chickpeas can be harvested at two different stages: as green, fresh peas or as mature, dried grain.

Step 5.1: Harvesting Green Chickpeas
If you want to harvest green chickpeas for fresh eating, pick them when you can feel the peas through the pods. This is usually about two months after sowing . The peas will be green and tender. Harvest regularly to encourage the plant to produce more pods. Wear gloves when harvesting in sunny weather, as the leaves can give off a substance that irritates the skin .

Step 5.2: Harvesting for Dried Grain
If you are growing chickpeas for dried grain, wait until the plants are fully mature. The leaves will turn yellow and dry, and the pods will turn brown or tan and become brittle. The seeds inside will rattle when you shake the pod . The seeds should be hard and not dent when pressed with a fingernail.

Step 5.3: Cut the Plants
When the crop is fully mature, cut the plants close to the ground using a sickle or a sharp knife. Let them dry in the field in small piles or windrows for a few days. This allows the remaining moisture in the plants to finish drying the pods.

Step 5.4: Protect from Rodents and Birds
As the grain dries, it becomes attractive to rodents and birds. If you are drying the plants in the field, watch for damage. In some areas, farmers stack the plants in a dry, protected place for final drying.

Step 5.5: Threshing
Once the plants and pods are completely dry, thresh them to separate the grain. This can be done by beating the plants with sticks on a clean floor, by having bullocks walk on them, or by using a threshing machine. If using a machine, adjust it gently so it does not crack the seeds.

Step 5.6: Winnowing
After threshing, the grain is mixed with chaff, broken pods, and dust. On a breezy day, winnow the mixture by dropping it from a height using a winnowing fan or basket. The wind blows away the light chaff, and the clean, heavy grain falls straight down.

Step 5.7: Cleaning
After winnowing, remove any remaining stones, broken seeds, or other debris by hand or with a simple sieve.
`,
          stage6: `Post-Harvest and Storage
Step 6.1: Dry the Grain Thoroughly
Even after threshing and winnowing, the grain may still have some moisture. Spread the clean grain in a thin layer on clean mats, tarpaulins, or a clean cemented floor. Turn it frequently so it dries evenly. Dry it in the sun for several days until it is completely hard and dry. Bite a seed; it should crack, not squash.

Step 6.2: Test for Moisture
Chickpeas stored with any moisture will develop mold and weevils. Make sure the grain is bone-dry before storage.

Step 6.3: Prepare Storage Containers
Clean your storage containers or gunny bags thoroughly. If reusing old bags, make sure they are completely clean and dry. Do not leave any old grain inside, as it may contain hidden insects.

Step 6.4: Mix with Natural Protectants
If you store grain in bags or bins, mix in some dried neem leaves or other aromatic leaves that repel insects. Some farmers also mix ash with the grain to deter weevils. Make sure the ash is cool and completely dry before mixing.

Step 6.5: Store Off the Ground
If using gunny bags, store them on wooden pallets or planks raised off the ground. Do not let the bags touch the wall, as walls can get damp. Keep the storage area clean, dry, and well-ventilated.

Step 6.6: Save Seed for Next Season
If you want to save your own seed for the next season, select the best, healthiest, and most uniform grains from your harvest. Store them separately in a clean, dry container. Chickpea seeds can remain viable for about three years if stored properly .

Step 6.7: Check Storage Periodically
Check your stored grain every few weeks. Put your hand deep into the grain and feel for any heat or moisture. Look for any signs of insects or mold. If you find any problems, re-dry the grain in the sun immediately.

By following these stages, you can grow healthy chickpeas naturally, work with their unique deep-rooted and drought-tolerant nature, and harvest good quality grain without using any chemicals.
`,
        },
        water: 'Low', 
        temp: '20-25°C', 
        duration: '90-110 days', 
        soil: 'Red soil', 
        fertilizer: 'NPK 20:60:40', 
        yield: '1.2-1.8 tons/ha' 
      }
    ]
  }
};

  useEffect(() => {
    if (!soilType || !season) {
      navigate('/');
      return;
    }

    setLoading(true);
    // Simulate API call
    setTimeout(() => {
      const crops = cropsDatabase[season]?.[soilType] || [];
      setFilteredCrops(crops);
      setLoading(false);
    }, 500);
  }, [soilType, season, navigate]);

  const handleCropClick = (crop) => {
    navigate(`/crop/${crop.id}`, { state: { crop } });
  };

  if (loading) {
    return (
      <div className="loading-container">
        <div className="loading-spinner"></div>
        <p>Finding best crops for your farm...</p>
      </div>
    );
  }

  return (
    <div className="crops-page">
      <div className="crops-header">
        <button onClick={() => navigate('/')} className="back-btn">
          <FaArrowLeft /> Back
        </button>
        <h1 className="crops-title">
          <FaSeedling className="crops-title-icon" />
          Recommended Crops
        </h1>
        <div className="selection-info">
          <span className="info-badge soil-badge">{soilType?.charAt(0).toUpperCase() + soilType?.slice(1)} Soil</span>
          <span className="info-badge season-badge">{season?.charAt(0).toUpperCase() + season?.slice(1)} Season</span>
        </div>
      </div>

      {filteredCrops.length === 0 ? (
        <div className="no-crops">
          <h2>No crops found for this combination</h2>
          <p>Try selecting different soil type or season</p>
          <button onClick={() => navigate('/')} className="btn-primary">
            Go Back
          </button>
        </div>
      ) : (
        <div className="crops-grid">
          {filteredCrops.map((crop) => (
            <div key={crop.id} className="crop-card">
              <div 
                className="crop-image"
                style={{ backgroundImage: `url(${crop.image})` }}
              >
                <div className="crop-overlay">
                  <button 
                    onClick={() => handleCropClick(crop)}
                    className="view-details-btn"
                  >
                    <FaInfoCircle /> View Details
                  </button>
                </div>
              </div>
              <div className="crop-info">
                <h3 className="crop-name">{crop.name}</h3>
                <p className="crop-description">{crop.titleDescription}</p>
                <div className="crop-quick-info">
                  <span className="quick-info-item">🌡️ {crop.temp}</span>
                  <span className="quick-info-item">💧 {crop.water}</span>
                  <span className="quick-info-item">⏱️ {crop.duration}</span>
                </div>
              </div>
            </div>
          ))}
        </div>
      )}
    </div>
  );
};

export default Crops;